Cultural Heritage a nd Contemporary Change  
Series IIA . Islam, Vol. 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Al-Ghazali Deliverance from Error and 
Mystical Union with the Almighty  
 
Al-Munqidh Min Al -Dalal  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 English Translation with Introduction by  Muhammad Ab ūlaylah  
and Critical Arabic text established with Nurshīf Abdul -Rahīm Rif’at 
Introduction and Notes by:  George F. McLean  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The Council for Research in Values and Philosophy   


Copyright  ©   2001  by 
 
The Council for Research in Values and Philosophy  
 
 
 
Gibbons Hall B -20 
620 Michigan Avenue,  NE 
Washington, D.C. 20064  
 
 
All rights reserved  
 
Printed in the United States of America  
 
Library of Congress Cataloging -in-Publication  
 
 
 
Al-Ghazali, Deliverance from Error and Mystical Union with the Almighty (al -Munqidh min al -Dalal / al-Ghazali) 
critical Arabic text established by Muhammad Abulaylah and Nurshif Abdul -Rahim Rif’at; English translation with 
introduction by Muhammad Abulaylah; introduction and notes by George F. McLean.  
 
p.cm. – (Cultural heritage and contemporary change.  Series IIA Islam; vol. 2 ) 
 
Includes bibliographical references and index.  
1. Al-Ghazali, 1058 -1111. 2. Sufism —Early works to 1800. I. Abulaylah, Muhammad. II. Abdul -Rahim Rif’at, 
Nurshif. III. McLean, George F. IV. Title. V . Series . 
BP80 .G3A3 1995                           95-14438  
297’. 4—dc20            CIP 
 
ISBN 1 -56518 -081-X (English Edition, pbk.)  
  

 
Table of Contents  
  
 
Abbreviations  
  
Translator's Introduction   
     Muhammad Abulaylah  
 
Life of Al -Ghazali           1 
Intellectual Milieu           14 
Translations and Editions          18 
Content and Value           21 
Renown            24 
  
Editor's Introduction  
   George F. McLean  
 
Context            29 
Life            31 
Works             34 
Analysis            36 
Meaning            43 
Impact             51 
 
English T ranslation   
 
Introduction            61 
Chapter I. The Way of Sophistry and the Denial of All Knowledge     65 
Chapter II. The Categories of Seekers        69 
Part I. Kalam           71 
Part II. Philosophy           73 
Part III. The Teacher           83 
Chapter  III. The  Sufi Mystic Way  to Truth        91 
Chapter IV. The True Nature of Prophecy        97 
Chapter V. Why I Returned to Teaching         101 
 
Notes             113 
Index             131 
  


Abbreviations   
 
 
AGth: G. Anawati and L. Gardet,  Introduction à la Thèologie Musulmane  (Paris: Vrin, 1948).  
BM: M.C. Barbier de Meynard, "Traduction . . . Le Préservatif de L`erreur",  Journal Asiatique  VII 
(1977), 5 -93. 
F: C. Field,  The Confessions of al -Ghazali  (London: Wisdom of the East, 1909).  
J: C.M. Jabre,  Al-Munqid h min adalal  (Beyrouth, 1959).  
Ja: C.M. Jabre, Arabic text of al -Ghazali, al -Munqidh min adalal (see above).  
M: D.B. MacDonald, "Emotional Religion in Islam . . .  Iya, Bk XVIII"  Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society  (1901 -1902), pp. 195 -252, 705 -748, 1 -28; "The Life of al -Ghazali, with Special 
Reference to His Religious Experiences and Opinions,"  Journal of the American Oriental 
Society , XX (1899), 71 -132. 
Sch: A. Wensinck,  La pensée de Ghazzali  (Paris, 1940).  
VDB: S. Van den Bergh,  Averroes  Tahafut al Tahaf ut (London: Luzac, 1969).  
VR: Laura Veccia Vagliere and Robert Rubinacci,  Scritti scelti di al -Ghazal  (Torino: Unione 
Tipografico -Editrici Torinese, 1970).  
W: J. Watt, "The Authenticity of Works Attributed to al -Ghazali,"  JRAS  (1952), 26 -27. 
  
 
  

Translato r's Introduction  
Mohammad Abulaylah  
 
 
Life of Al-Ghazali  
 
Al-Ghaz ali's full name is Abu Hamid Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ahmad al -Tusi al -
Ghaz ali (450-505 A.H./1058 -1111 A.D.). In Latin his name was Algazel. He was known as the 
proof and ornament of Islam. He was an encyclopedic author, polymath, a great jurist, theorist, 
philosopher, theologian, moralist, critic, comparative religionist; above all  he was a religious 
reformer and spiritual revivalist who sacrificed himself completely to his belief and ideal.  
He was born in Tus near  Mashad,  Persia  (now  Iran). Having gained an excellent reputation as 
a scholar, he was appointed in 484 A.H. (1091 A.D.)  by the Seljuk minister Nizam al -Mulk to 
teach at  Nizamiyya  Academy  which was founded by him in  Baghdad. At this great city al -
Ghaz ali's followers grew in number until they outnumbered even the retinues of the emirs and 
magnates (al -Safadi, al -Wafi, bi al -Wafayat, ed. H. Ritter et al. [Wisbaden, 1962], pp. 274 -277). 
Al-Ghaz ali proved a great and influential lecturer in that institute. But in the month of Dhu'l Qa'da 
in the year 488 A.H. (1095 A.D.) after enduring a personal crisis he gave up the entirety of  his 
worldly position and led the way of renunciation and solitude. He performed the pilgrimage, and, 
upon his return visited  Syria  and lived there for sometime in the city ofDamascus. Thereafter he 
visited  Jerusalem  passing his time in worship, learning c ontemplation and writing. After a life 
filled with great intellectual and spiritual achievements al -Ghaz ali died on Monday, the fourteenth 
of Jumada al -Akhira in the year 505 (1111) at Tabaran, the citadel (qasba) of Tus, where he was 
interred.  
Al-Ghaz ali's writings, whether biographical or of general academic content, hold a faithful 
mirror to the society of his time and to his own person. From his writings we may glean not only 
details of his life, but also valuable information about his psychology and c haracter.  
Al-Ghaz ali is not a merely theoretical writer. He illustrates his arguments with real examples, 
and his advice is based on his own experience. He was writing to people who were known to him 
and whose needs he knew very well. He was one of the gre atest Imams in the field of reformation, 
and as such he suffered from what we may call the sickness of his society and paid for it.  
Great reformers have their sicknesses and sorrows, not because of their own state of health, 
but because the state of their nation drags them down and makes them feel ill. Their illnesses come 
from the social, moral and behavioral sicknesses of their society, from the sickbed of the nation, 
when it strays from the right path.  
Great people have suffered more from this kind of il lness than from their own physical 
symptoms. Any physical sicknesses they had were slight compared with the sickness that came to 
them from contemplating their society.  
The great man is a gift from God to his society, and a gift from God may be accepted or  
denied. Al -Ghaz ali was both son and father to his society. He gave to it more than he took out. He 
continued his struggle against evil forces, ill -thinking, and false assumptions which traded in the 
name of Islam until death forced him to stop. He was not  defeated by the persecution which his 
efforts brought upon him. He did not buckle under criticism; rather, it gave him added strength to 
stand his ground and to make his voice heard in all places and at all times.  

If moralists had not been able to rouse themselves, they would not have been able to defend 
the higher ground of their convictions. The system of morals would have collapsed; virtue would 
have been buried alive; civilization would have become bankrupt.  
Al-Ghaz ali was "sick" from the people of hi s time. They were a trial to him. He was not a 
politician but he suffered the bad symptoms that afflict those who deal in politics. He was attacked 
by the germs of hypocrisy which surrounded his fellow scholars. He suffered because of the 
unhealthy differe nces which existed between Muslim sects, between Sunni and Shiite which had 
reached a dangerous zenith in his day, and because of the corruption among the adherents of 
Sufism and the theologians.  
In his time, the sects that claimed to be part of Islam were  at war among themselves. Shia, 
Sunna, Mutazilite, Ismaili, theologians, the patrons of the Brothers of Purity, and the natural 
philosophers, all these, for their differences, were ranged on one side, and al -Ghaz ali on the other.  
Knowing that al -Ghaz ali suffered all his life from these major symptoms and maladies of his 
society, his own personal maladies seem to us slight in comparison. The great Imam was well 
aware of the link between his own poor health and the sickness of the society which besieged him.  
As a child and as a young man before the age of twenty, he was recklessly ambitious and 
daring. He says that he thirsted after comprehension of things as they really are. This was his 
obsession from an early age; it was instinctive, part of his Godgiven na ture, a matter of 
temperament not of choice or contriving. But the more he progressed into the fields of academic 
and religious thinking of his society, the more he suffered, to the point that at a time of his greatest 
success, when he occupied the highest  academic chair in al -Nizamiyya University in Baghdad, 
teaching 300 students, he lost all desire to continue.  
As has been mentioned before, al -Ghaz ali writes about himself, his society, his religion and 
his sufi experience. His writings shed light on each aspect of his time and display even the trivial 
details of history and the social disparities of his time. In his voluminous encyclopedic work "The 
Revival of the Religious Sciences" he wrote about the religious branches of knowledge and the 
religious comm unities of his time. We have translated the  Book of Knowledge , which is the first 
book of this work and provided it with an introduction.  
Al Munqidh min al -Dalal  "The Deliverance from Confusion" may be categorized as 
autobiographical in nature. In this boo k, al-Ghaz ali profiles some highly important information 
about himself as a man and as a thinker, and about his evaluation of contemporary religious 
thinking and trends. For this reason the book is of prime importance. We shall have the opportunity 
to disc uss it later.  
In his book  Bidayat al hidaya  (The Beginning of Guidance ) also, al -Ghaz ali includes 
information about himself and the academic community of his time. Al -Ghaz ali observed how 
people received his book,  Ihya, and replied to criticism of it. He w rote a book about the different 
kinds of boasters, dividing them into groups, discussing and analyzing each in his own way. He 
wrote  Mi'yaral Ilm  (The Yardstick of Knowledge ) to help confused students and academics 
perceive what knowledge is false, what ge nuine: what should be accepted, what should be rejected. 
This led the Imam on to write  Mizan Al -'amal  (The Yardstick of Action ) and  Tahafut al  Falasifa 
(Contradictions among the  Philosophers).  
We have listed these titles not in orders to show how many book s al-Ghaz ali wrote, but rather 
to show how each volume was intended to deal with a problem and with problem -makers of his 
time.  
Although Imam Ghaz ali lived in difficult times we should not overlook the fact that this gave 
rise to his greatness. If his time  was one of political upheaval and internal dispute in religion and 

sectarian factions, it was also a time of great scholars, and a time when knowledge was honored 
and learned men were respected and well paid. It was a time when a few chosen scholars could  
silence the hypocritical masses and purveyors of falsehood.  
Al-Munqidh min al -Dalal reflects al -Ghaz ali's life and his own spiritual experience and 
development. There is no doubt at all about its authorship, but some critics have argued against its 
value as a historical document, as we shall see later.  
Al-Ghaz ali took issue with the scholars of the Batinyya sect, criticizing their principles and 
doctrines. He wrote several books about them and refers to some of them in the book translated 
here. This should add to his credibility as a sign of his courage in facing up to such dangerous 
opponents. We should keep this in mind when we turn to al -Ghaz ali's political stance, which some 
critics have not taken into account. Defence of religion means defense of the state and of society 
as a whole.  
From the title and introduc tion we can draw further insights. Al -Ghaz ali was familiar with the 
causes of the confusion and error that had befallen the nation. He says that most of the mistakes of 
the thinkers of his day came from believing what they had heard and were familiar with from 
childhood, having received it from their fathers, teachers and people regarded as virtuous. Al -
Ghaz ali had come to doubt what he had been told, and he urges others to doubt, as the reader of 
the present work will find.  
Moreover, al -Ghaz ali says that " anyone who does not doubt will not investigate, and anyone 
who does not investigate cannot see, and anyone who does not see will remain in blindness and 
error." Al -Ghaz ali, here as elsewhere, considers skepticism as a source of knowledge and 
discovery beca use anybody who blindly accepts is not investigating or fathoming what he accepts. 
As a matter of fact, the Qur'an urged people to doubt their father's beliefs, traditions and customs. 
Many verses of the Qur'an say that Allah, referring to Himself, asks pe ople if they have any doubts 
about His creations. This means that Allah expects people to doubt. Doubt can lead to a firmer 
belief, unless it is a symptom of a mental illness or spiritual disturbance. Faith in Allah can be 
deep -seated in the heart, but the  heart still requires psychological reassurance, as in the case of 
Abraham when he asked Allah how he could give life to the dead. Allah told him, "Don't you 
believe?" "Yes indeed, but my heart needs to be at peace." This Gnostic method featured later in 
the work of Descartes, in fact is central to Descartes's philosophy.  
Al-Ghaz ali occupies a unique position among Islamic philosophers in recommending doubt 
within the boundary of faith. He was original and pioneering.  
As we have already said, some critics h ave argued about the historical value of 
the Deliverance from Error . Some went as far as to say that it was intended as novel, with himself 
as the central figure of the novel, a  Bildungsroman  (a development novel) as the Germans call this 
genre. These crit ics regard the book not as a true record of his real life and development, but as a 
fictional account written when he had finished developing. For example, Abd Al -Daim al -Baqari 
says that al -Munqidh is neither an  Apologia pro vita sua  nor an autobiography,  but a novel with a 
message, a sort of  roman a thése , with al -Ghaz ali himself as the hero. He was trying to "leave to 
posterity a fictional image of his personality and give an interpretation of his life which would give 
him an unrivaled place in all the d omains of thought and of the life of the Muslims of his time, 
including especially the knowledge and practice of  Tasawwuf  (Sophism). With a dosage of 
avowals insinuations which without being totally false would not correspond to historical reality." 
The cr ux of this argument is that al -Ghaz ali himself said that his actions were not directed towards 
Allah, but towards his own quest for fame and prestige.  

Al-Baqari makes these avowals the explicative principle of the whole life of al -Ghaz ali, his 
actions, mov ements, reposes and intentions, not only before his withdrawal, but even after." 
(Itirafat al -Ghaz ali, Cairo, 1943; McCarthy, p. xxvi). This, in our view, is an untenable criticism. 
It stretches the text too far from it's context and the author's psycholog y and career.  
Al-Ghaz ali's confession should add to his reputation, rather than detract from it. Great people 
are never self -satisfied. Prophets look at their own work critically, unless it is revelation from God.  
Once a phrenologist looked at a bust of So crates and said, "This man is controlled by lust and 
imperfection." People responded vehemently that "this was the most virtuous man on earth." But 
Socrates said, "No, it is true. What he said is true about my nature, but I have striven to overcome 
the imp erfections."  
If al-Ghaz ali told us about something in his inner self we should not take it as a means to 
attack him or to doubt what he says. In this case, we should look at the man's actions and his efforts 
to improve himself, not at his confession and ho ld it against him.  
To doubt the reliability and historical value of al -Ghaz ali's books, moreover, entails saying 
that al -Ghaz ali was attempting in fictional form to prove the inferiority of the mind and the 
evidence of the sense compared with the illuminat ing light which Allah reveals to worthy men. 
This cannot be true when one sees al -Ghaz ali's sincerity and devotion. The book itself cannot 
support this interpretation. In no way does it give the impression of being affectation. This is one 
reason, perhaps a psychological reason.  
Secondly, all al -Ghaz ali's other books and recorded conversations support what he says in this 
book, e.g., his conversation with the contemporary historian Abd Al -Ghafir al -Farisi preserved by 
Ibn-Asakir in his book  Tabyeen kadhib a l-Muftari  as referred to in my introduction to the Arabic 
text. 
Indeed, as a writer, the art of writing may cause one to shift emphases in the presentation. But 
the book holds a faithful mirror to the natural development of al -Ghaz ali's character and 
knowl edge.  
Here we may refer to two poems written by al -Ghaz ali himself at the time of his spiritual and 
intellectual doubts.  
 
With light the face of Your Majesty was revealed.  
And I wondered  
And in You all -manifest, lay my confusion.  
O You are the nearest of things.  
You have revealed Yourself, filling my view.  
With Your manifestation of light, but becoming hidden  
in a way which nearly left me without  faith.  
When You hid Yourself You threw between  mind  
and senses a difference that brooks no compromise.  
If mind claims to know Your Presence and denies the  
sense, who called it impossible.  
The senses say to the  mind stop here.  
This is because the senses deny You O  God as a  
picture to be seen and the  mind sees You through abstract evidence  
. . . 
Indeed I am so busy w ith the cultivation of my  soul 
and my business helps me to control myself.  

The doubt of transitory things has been cast away from me  
By a witness that comes like a beacon to me.  
By it I have seen the  Godly light very clear  
from behind delicate screens that  cover things,  
then I became certain about the things.  
That previously I doubted.  
And I have seen what was secret and hidden [to me]  
And I have known the aim of my  creation, the reason for my existence.  
My death and my resurrection  
By the mirror of the  soul in whose bright surface there appeared  
this world and the hereafter, the whole truth, the every aspect of the truth.  
I know that no shade of doubt remained with me about the things  
that make some people very doubtful.  
The soul took its travelling staff and became sure that my light had  
shone on the right road for me . . .  
My light had shone over the face of my resting place as  
evidence of what I have said there is the state of  sleep,  
when the senses slip away while you rest, and the tablet of the unseen faces the  soul like two 
bright  
mirrors, and what the tablet contains is reflected into the  soul.  
Then my  soul takes its knowledge from there,  
and the knowledge that I have is a copy of what is there.   
 
This example can of course be multiplied. Al -Ghaz ali was quite aware of his greatness, and 
we cannot take this as false self -importance.  
He did show sings of arrogance and boastfulness, especially in his youth. Here and there he 
mentions something concerning his personality and experiences, not only in writin g but also in 
conversation as referred to above. Moreover the earliest of his biographers, Abd Al -Ghafir al -
Farisi (d. 529 A.H./1134 A.D.) wrote the following eighteen years after al -Ghaz ali's death.  
He related to us on certain nights what his circumstance s had been from the time he first 
openly followed the path of godliness and the mystical experience overcame him after he delved 
deeply into the various branches of knowledge and that he had behaved arrogantly to everybody, 
when he spoke boasting of how Go d's favor had singled him out, enabling him to master many 
kinds of knowledge and research them.  
He continued in this way until he felt disgust with the Arabic sciences which were not 
concerned with the hereafter and final goal, and what benefits and helps  in the hereafter.  
He had begun his asceticism under the guidance and companionship of al Farmadhi. From 
him he learned how to open up the gates to Sophism -- Tariqa  -- and followed his instructions 
about the performance of the duties of worship, of extra might -prayers, and of continual invocation 
of God's name.  
He continued in this way until he had overcome all these obstacles. He took on these burdens, 
but he did not achieve what he wanted. Then he related that he had studied every branch of 
knowledge and  delved deeply into all aspects of learning and experience, and had again put all his 
strength and made every effort to study every complicated part of the sciences.  
He proceeded to the interpretation of these works and continued to do so until he had unlo cked 
the doors to every branch of knowledge.  

He also told us that he became for a certain time busy with the counterbalancing of the 
proofs  Takafu' al Adilla  and the minute details of the problems. Then he told us that a door of the 
fear of God opened befo re him and took all his attention, forcing him to abandon everything else, 
until it became easy for him to accept the other way of religious practice and he then became 
perfectly disciplined and the reality of things became clear to him, and he turned into  what we 
expected of him, behaving well with a good character, exact insight. This was the sign of the 
happiness which God had allocated to him before time began.  
Then we asked him about how he had wished to leave his home and return to resume what 
was req uired of him in Nishabour (to teach in al -Nizamiyyah Academy). He said apologetically, 
"There was no way that my religion would permit me to refuse a request to spread God's message 
for the benefit of students, and indeed it was my duty to reveal the truth  and speak about it and call 
others to it."  
Later he abandoned teaching and returned to his home. He built a school beside his house 
where he could receive seekers after knowledge and provide a hostel for Sufis. Thereafter he 
divided his time according to those who would come to him, sometimes reciting the Qur'an, 
sometimes sitting with the Sufis, sometimes teaching, so he did not waste a single moment of his 
time nor of the other people's time.  
In his late years al -Ghaz ali occupied himself with the study o f Hadith , especially  Al Bukhari's 
and Muslim's Sahihs , and shortly before his death, al -Ghaz ali was reading in Sahih al -Bukhari, 
and it was reported that he died while the book was still in his hand. Al -Farisi, adding to the 
statement above, mentioned that , "had al -Ghaz ali lived longer he would even have ranked higher 
than most eminent in the [Muslim] tradition. Here we shall assemble some of Abd Al -Ghafir's 
statements about al -Ghaz ali, not necessarily in the order in which they occur: "He is a proof that 
Islam works as a system . . . the tongue of Islam . . . the Imam of the Imams of religion . . . eyes 
have never seen another like him in his ability to speak, his eloquence, expression, quick 
understanding and natural command." (Ibn Asakir, Tabin Kadhib al -Muftar i [Beirut, Dar al -Kitab 
al-Arabi, 1979], pp. 291ff.)  
In Nishabour al -Ghaz ali attended Imam al -Haramayn al -Juwayni's lectures and studied hard 
and graduated in a short time. He outstripped his fellows. He committed the Qur'an to memory 
while still you ng and became the most able debater of his time and outstanding among the students 
of Imam al -Haramayn. His fellow students benefitted from his teaching and guidance, and he never 
stopped learning. He began to write books. Imam al -Haramayn, despite his hig h rank and his ability 
to talk fluently, did not regard al -Ghaz ali with favor when they were alone together. This was 
because al -Ghaz ali was quick to understand and his teacher was not happy that his student had 
started to compose books so early, although as his teacher it would reflect credit on him.  
This is human nature, though the teacher appeared proud of al -Ghaz ali in public and 
encouraged his success, but in his heart he nursed jealousy.  
This situation persisted until Imam al -Haramayn died in 478 A.H.  (1085 A.D.). And then al -
Ghaz ali went to Nishabour and attended the assembly of the minister Nizam al -Mulk. The minister 
welcomed him because he ranked high as a scholar among the scholars and great Imams who 
gathered at the minister's court.  
Al-Ghaz ali, no doubt, had benefited from this great assembly of rival scholars. His name rose 
over the horizon. Later al -Ghaz ali moved to  Baghdad  to teach again in the academy during the 
ministry of Fakhr al -Mulk. Everybody there admired his teaching and skill in debating, and he did 
not find anyone his equal. After he had been the Imam of Khurasan he became by then the Imam 
of Ira q. In this time al -Ghaz ali wrote excellent books about Fiqh, Islamic Jurisprudence and its 

methodology. His fame now ranked higher in  Baghdad  so that it even outranked that of princes 
and official of the caliphate administration.  
But suddenly everything tu rned. He abandoned it all and gave up everything he suffered to 
attain in life and occupied himself wholly with religious duties and activities directed to the 
hereafter. He went to perform pilgrimage; then he went to  Syria  and remained there for ten years . 
While there he wrote such well -known and original writings as  Ihya Ulum al -Din, the revival of 
religious knowledge . 
He strove against his soul and his own behavior in order to perfect his own character and to 
cultivate his manner. Every bad quality in al -Ghaz ali turned into a good one. He turned away from 
seeking fame and material gain and clothed himself in the garments of the righteous.  
He scaled down his hopes in this world and devoted his time to guiding people to do what 
would benefit them in the hereafter, to make this world abhorrent to them, and to make them 
prepare for the long journey to the everlasting abode.  
When he went back home, he busied himself with contemplation. He was visited by many 
people. He was a treasure supplying people's heart s with piety and guidance. His writings and 
books were widely disseminated and there was no contradiction between what he taught and how 
he lived.  
No one objected to his teachings, and when Fakhr al -Mulk became a minister and heard of al -
Ghaz ali and admire d his extensive knowledge, virtuous character, pure faith, and sociability, he 
sought blessings from him, attended his classes and listened to his lectures. Then he asked him to 
return to teaching in the academy, so that his precious knowledge and fruitful  learning should not 
be locked away without benefitting anyone. He begged him to accept his request and al -Ghaz ali 
finally fulfilled his wishes and went to Nishabour to teach in al -Nizamiyyah.  
This statement is a very important one which has not been given  enough attention by al -
Ghaz ali's biographers and critics. It is unfortunate that we cannot put a precise date between al -
Ghaz ali and Abd Al -Ghafir. However it is possible to say that it occurred before al -Ghaz ali finally 
withdrew from public life, and it is clear that no reference is made in this statement to al -Ghaz ali's 
book  al-Munqidh  either as already written, nor did he mention any intention of writing it.  
This is a definite indication that the book dates from later in al -Ghaz ali's life. Even more 
importantly Abd Al -Ghafir asked him why he left his post in  Baghdad  and stopped teaching in al -
Nizamiyya. This is the precise question that appears at the beginning of al -Munqidh, and the whole 
conversation is more or less reproduced in the introduction of th e book.  
Al-Ghaz ali tells us in the very first line that he wrote his book in response to a brother in the 
faith who had requested him to do so. We feel quite justified in saying that this brother in the faith 
was a real person not a fiction, or a literary device as McCarthy suggests, and not al -Ghaz ali 
himself as Abd al -Jalil al -Baqari assumed. We may even venture to assert that the brother in faith 
was Abd al -Ghafir al Farisi himself or at least one of the people who attended the same meeting.  
Another line  of criticism which is leveled against al -Ghaz ali is that he did not take an active 
part in the wars between the crusaders and Muslims in his time. The army of the crusaders 
entered  Antioch  in Syria  in 491 A.H. (1097 A.D.) 100,000 Muslims were killed in 49 5 A.H. (1101 
A.D.). The Western forces captured  Jerusalem  and remained in control there for eleven years, but 
there is no mention of this in the writings of al -Ghaz ali. This is strange when one bears in mind 
that he did mention dates close to these when sp eaking of his own career. He did speak about 
eminent figures such as Ibn Hanbal, Ibn Hazm, Ibn Taymiyya, who were prominent in the struggle 
against political decay and corruption among the caliphs. I do not personally agree with the critics 
who accuse al -Ghazali of ignoring political events. He did care about the Muslim nation, it's 

religious stand and political supremacy. It is absurd to say that al -Ghaz ali welcomed the invasion 
ofSyria  or felt happy about the mass killing of Muslims; it would be naive to think this.  
A great personality can be perfect in one or more areas of life or of knowledge. This is true of 
al-Ghaz ali's personality when it is examined closely. His character blossomed in the fields of 
scholarship, religion and social reform, particularl y education. He was effective in restating the 
intellectual and spiritual basis of his time. He stood firm against the eminent representatives of the 
various sects and the authorities of his time (specially the Batinites, who threatened the lives of 
their opponents with violence and assassination). In support of this point it is useful to refer to Abd 
al-Qahir al -Baghdadi (d.429 A.H./1037 A.D.) who said that in his time the Batinites presented the 
most evil force and dangerous threat to Islam and Muslims (U sul al -Din, p. 329 -331).  
Al-Ghaz ali was uncompromising in his attitude toward them. He wrote several books 
attacking the Batinites. In turn, they must have attacked him and even threatened his life -- his 
constant move from place to place may lend support to this. Bearing this in mind, such a man 
cannot be accused of cowardice or opting -out. Al -Ghaz ali took issue with the scholars of his time, 
especially the corrupt ones, emphasizing the importance of a good education for children since 
they are the basis and the new force of society. A society can be made strong through its children. 
Neglect of their e ducation leads to a hypocritical, careless, faithless and loose generation of adults, 
corrupt rulers and cowardly army officers.  
The author under review seems to have concentrated his attention on the source of corruption 
and decay in society, rather than upon the symptoms.  
Al-Ghaz ali had a good relationship with the rulers of his time but did not hesitate to advise 
them when he saw fit. It should be noted, however, that as a Sufi he criticized the scholars for 
consorting with rulers, but cannot be criticiz ed for doing this very thing due to his integrity and 
drawing no advantage from their company. He lived a hard life until his death and never accepted 
the gifts of money that were offered. Rulers have to be supported, advised and corrected. They 
must not b e left without scholarly and religious guidance, lest their views become narrow and they 
be surrounded by hypocrites and faithless opportunitists. Reforming the society, correcting the 
rulers and defending the people's human rights is the responsibility of  the scholars and learned 
men. (See al -Subki,  Tabaqat , vol. 4, p. 110. Also F.R.C. Bagley al -Ghaz ali's Book of Council for 
Kings  [London, 1964].)  
Another trend of criticism leveled at al -Ghaz ali is that he retreated from public life for eleven 
years, leavi ng his people without the benefit of his advice.  
He should not be blamed for this, for he was preparing himself for a greater role later. Prophets 
and scholars of higher repute withdrew from society for long periods. It is obvious that our great 
Imam was i nclined by nature to keep his distance. He perceived that mixing with people brings 
trouble. In his book  Ihya he wrote about the privileges of seclusion.  
According to al -Manawi, al -Ghaz ali says in a poem, "In mixing with people there is no benefit, 
and ign orance about the reality of things is not like a scholar. You who ignorantly criticize me for 
keeping away from people, my reason [for doing this] is engraved on my ring." When they read 
the inscription on his ring they found this verse, "For the most of t hem we did not find any 
commitment to principle. We find that most of them are faithless" (Qur'an 7: 102).   
 
Intellectual Milieu   
 
Following the intellectual climate vividly referred to by al -Ghaz ali, one is much impressed to 
see that al -Ghaz ali became a m eteor in the galaxy of the greatest scholars and divines of his time.  

To cite but a few examples of al -Ghaz ali’s great contemporaries: Imam Al -Haramayn, Abu 
al-Ma’ali Abd al -Malik Al -Juwayni (d. 478 A.H./1085 A.D.), the mentor who discovered the 
young geni us in al -Ghaz ali and is rightly his moral and scholarly patron, as well as of the Nishapur 
Academy, established also by Nizam al -Mulk, in addition to heading many other institutions of 
teaching.  
Abu Ishaq al -Shirazi (418 A.H./1027 A.D.) who also headed Naz amia academy at  Baghdad.  
Abd al -Salam Ibn Yusuf of Nishapur, Ibn Yusuf al -Qazwini (d. 482 A.H./1089 A.D.), the 
head of the Mu ’tazilite school, who wrote a commentary on the Qur ’an in seven hundred volumes.  
Abu Turab, the head and the  Mofti  of Asharite in N ishapur (d. 492 A.H./1098 A.D.).  
Abu Muhammad al -Misri (d. 486 A.H./1093 A.D.).  
Abu Ali Ibn Ahmad al -Waqidi (d. 468 A.H./1075 A.D.).  
Abu Bakr al -Bayhaqi (d. 458 A.H./1065 A.D.).  
Abu Ali al -Husayn Ibn Abd Allah, Ibn Sina, known in the West as Avicenna, the greatest of 
Muslim philosophers, (370 -428 A.H./980 -1037 A.D.), and his disciple Abu Abd Allah al -Masumi 
about whom Ibn Sina says, "Al -Masumi is to me what Aristotle is to Plato" ( ibid., p. 230).  
Omar al -Khayyam, the Persian Astronomer and poet already ment ioned in the introduction.  
On the Sufi side, al -Ghaz ali was a contemporary and quite aware of the following great 
figures:  
Abu Ali al -Daqqaq (d. 415 A.H./1024 A.D.).  
Abd al -Rahman al -Sulami the Sufi Qur ’an interpreter, historian and chronicler.  
Abu al-Abbas al -Qassar.  
Abu al -Qasim al -Qushayri, the writer of the celebrated  Risala  (Epistle) on Sufism and the 
sufis. It is worth noting that the author of  al-Munqidh  made reference to only two of the most 
eminent Muslim philosophers: Abu Nasr al -Farabi (d.  339 A.H./950 A.D.), usually called the 
second teacher, after Aristotle, and al -Muallim al -Thani, known in the West as Averroes and as an 
interpreter of Aristotle.  
Ibn Sina deserves special attention here, since he is al -Ghaz ali’s contemporary, and was 
singled out by him as a specimen for moral criticism when he pinpointed the will in which Ibn 
Sina recorded his confession of drinking alcohol and his pledge that he would never take the 
draught unless as medicine.  
It is evident that Ibn Sina was fond of banq uets, luxury and being entertained. He used to 
deliver his lectures at night time and at the end of his lectures ordered a banquet to be laid and 
music to be played for the pleasure of his guests and pupils. He used to drink to excess until his 
health bega n to deteriorate. As a cure he took a powerful medicine which broke down his health. 
When he felt that his death was eminent, he stopped drinking and repented and asked God ’s 
forgiveness. Like al -Ghaz ali Ibn Sina died in his middle years. Yet it should not  be overlooked 
that he was brought within the precincts of the Islamic tradition. He memorized the Qur ’an when 
he was ten years of age. He mastered Islamic and Arabic literature by the time he reached sixteen 
and became well -known in the whole of the Islam ic world both as a physician and as a philosopher.  
It is to the credit of Ibn Sina that he did not succumb to adverse sectarian influences. And he 
himself said that his father often read the epistle of the brotheren of purity,  Rasail Ikhwan al -Safa, 
yet wa s not influenced by them in any notable way. This in itself was a great sign of the 
independent mind and free -thinking he envisaged at an early stage of his life. In the same way as 
al-Ghaz ali, Ibn Sina was noted for his consistency from the beginning to t he end of his life. The 
weight and style of his books in old age C say in his fifties C are as powerful and effective as those 
he wrote in youth.  

The first topic that appears immediately after al -Ghaz ali’s introduction to the  al-Munqidh  is 
sophistry: which  is more or less a system of learning that misleads pupils or followers C on narrow 
scales. In this section:   
 
- 1st, al -Ghaz ali, in his search after certitude was ushered into false views.  
- 2nd, When he resorted to reason, he discovered no distinction be tween his experience and 
the dream world.  
- 3rd, He reverted to the guidelines of reason.   
 
Al-Ghaz ali began his career with the study of theology, but theology failed to satisfy him. Its 
objectives were the protection of the  sunnah , tradition, and its def ense against the deviations of 
the heretics; it did not serve his purpose, which was the search for truth.  
But it is striking that he placed the speculative theologians, Mutakalimun, at the top of his list. 
The reason, as far as we can understand, is that this group of thinkers predominated over the rest 
and attracted people's attention. As they exercised immense influence upon the illusioned society, 
it was al -Ghaz ali's role to disillusion them from their own sophist illusionment.  
The eminent Sunnite schol ars attacked the speculative theology of al -Kalam and strongly 
warned Muslims against preoccupation with it as an undesirable innovation. Al -Ghaz ali himself 
wrote in more detail about the Kal am in his book al-Ihyya . As an illustration, he says, "Tawhid" 
the oneness of God is the term which has changed its meaning. It now means the craft of theology, 
knowledge of methods of arguing and confronting adversaries, boasting, multiplying questions, 
and casting doubts on matters, showing down opponents. This is true  to the point that some 
practitioners, i.e, Mu'tazilites, called themselves the people of justice and pure monotheism.  
In his search for truth, Imam al -Ghaz ali turned to philosophy, including the natural sciences, 
which gave him a penetrating insight into the marvels of creation. In the view of al -Ghaz ali no one 
who had studied anatomy could fail to notice the perfection of human and animal organs and to 
recognize in them evidence of the creator ’s master hand. He found himself unable to go along with 
the na tural scientists, in particular he emphatically rejected their denial of resurrection and sensual 
pleasure. But it should be noted that he does not reject philosophy and science altogether, he still 
believed that there was much truth in Aristotle, whom lik e Plato and Soc rates was regarded as a 
“theist” . The Imam sums up his view of the philosophers and scientists by pointing out that they 
served neither to prove nor disprove the existence of God. Al -Ghaz ali urged that the majority of 
people should be protected from potentially harmful ideas: he refers to the Epistles of the Ikhawan 
al-Safa and then says in warning, "Just as the poor swimmer must be kept from the slippery banks, 
so must mankind be kept from r eading these books" and by analogy all similar books that can 
mislead and harm the average Muslims. After examining philosophy al -Ghaz ali stepped out of it 
and continued his search for truth.  
True knowledge is derived from divine inspiration (from faith, r ather than from the dictates 
of dry logic). Out of this combination of guiding reason and inspiring and unflickering Faith in the 
Divine, al -Ghaz ali emerged. From this station he became the triumphant exponent of the religion 
of Islam, and thus was fitting ly called Hujjat ul Islam, the proof of Islam.  
 
Translations and Editions of Al-Munqidh   
 
The text of al -Munqidh was rediscovered in 1842 A.D. by the scholar, Augste Schmolders, 
who found the text, translated it into French and published it for the first t ime in  Paris. Sixty -seven 

years later in 1909, the text appeared in English, translated by Claude Field under the title,  The 
Confessions of al -Ghaz ali. This translation reads well for the most part, but could be more faithful 
and precise. Professor Watt's translation tried to improve on Field's version. It was published under 
the title,  The Faith and Practice of al -Ghaz ali (London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1953). We 
have already said something about this version. The third and most recent translation into  English 
is by Richard Joseph McCarthy S.J. and bears the title,  Freedom and Fulfillment  (Boston, 1980).  
The volume also includes related texts by al -Ghaz ali translated by McCarthy. His translation 
reads well and is painstakingly clear and accurate. He ben efited from previous translations and 
scholarly works on al -Ghaz ali, drawing heavily on the studies by Boggs and Jabre. In his lengthy 
introduction of sixty pages (the text of the translation is fifty -three pages) and plentiful footnotes, 
McCarthy emphasiz es the uniqueness of al -Ghaz ali and the importance of studying his thought.  
McCarthy based his translation not only on the well -known edition, but also on a new 
manuscript given to him by Father Boggy dated 509 A.H (1036 A.D), i.e. five years after al -
Ghaz ali's death and about ten years after  al-Munqidh  was composed. This is the covert form, for 
McCarthy is fully aware that there is no serious difference between this early manuscript and the 
one used by Salibah and Ayyad, Jabre and Watt. In editing our Arabic text we have checked other 
manuscripts and several other editions of  al-Munqidh . 
McCarthy read the previous translations and decided that there was still a need for his new 
one. He tells us that his translation was written while he was reading  al-Munqidh  to his students 
at Oxford. He came up with some ideas that he thought worth publishing. McCarthy believes that 
his translation reads better and gives a more fair reflection of al -Ghaz ali's life than do previous 
versions.  
Reading that translation and the footnotes, we may say that the translation is good, but still 
not perfect; it has not deterred us from our decision to make yet another translation. Beyond doubt, 
McCarthy has done justice to the text, illuminating it's meaning and making it available to speakers 
of English. His footnotes, in general, serve the text well and enable us to understand al -Ghaz ali's 
statements.  
Nevertheless, on some occasions the footnotes are too bulky, incorporating irrelevant material, 
and addressing the general reader ra ther than the specialist. He refers to secondary sources and 
does not refer the  Hadiths  back to their respective authorities; in several cases he failed to identify 
al-Ghaz ali's sources. McCarthy's translation of the  Hadith  about the division of the Muslim  nation 
into sects is incomplete and incorrect. Occasionally he confuses his reader when he refers to the 
authority of a certain  Hadith . 
We therefore intend to introduce our own translation, feeling that it is needed and will prove 
useful. I will not try t o justify this decision, beyond saying that Allah directed me to produce this 
translation which is directed wholly and sincerely to Him.  
Our translation takes into consideration the other translations in English, particularly M. Watt 
and McCarthy, and also  the fragments of  al-Munqidh  that are in circulation in the writings of the 
orientalists.  
We have noted some differences in understanding the text and we have differed also from 
Farid Jabri ’s French translation (Beirut, 1969), which appears in the bibliography. We have sought 
to give the most lucid rendering -- one that we consider much closer to al -Ghaz ali’s text and trend 
of thought.  
We have read and checked the available outstanding Arabic editions of this remarkable text. 
Two rare manuscripts: f irst, Shahid Ali Pasha, no. 1712, Istanbul, which is complete and well -
written, and which dates from 509 A.H. -510 A.H. (1115 A.D. -1116 A.D.), five years after the 

death of the author. This manuscript was dedicated directly to al -Ghaz ali. The second one is 
Talat,  Cairo, Dar al -kutub, no. 637, which is important yet incomplete.  
Two outstanding Arabic editions deserve special comment: The Arabic text first published in 
Damascus (1956) by Jamil Salibah and Shukry Ayyad is good in the main; it is not the first e dition 
of al-Munqidh  from the chronological point of view, but to a great extent it is the most readable 
and tolerable version. The authors based their edition on the available extant Arabic versions. As 
they remarked, it was only by chance that they struc k upon a single manuscript which lends 
authenticity to the Arabic version on which we are working. It should be noted, however, that the 
manuscript they had in hand was recently copied from an unknown and unverified version.  
But luckily enough the differen ce between the printed, published version, on the one hand, 
and the extant available manuscript, on the other hand, is not serious in many cases. Hence, our 
work and painstaking effort is to bring out a better, more critical and perfectly readable text. Th is 
can be seen from our Arabic version, appended here, if read against other versions in circulation.  
The second version to attract our critical attention is the version of  al-Munqidh  by his 
Eminence Sheikh Abdul Halim Mahmoud (Cairo, Dar -al Maarif, 1988).  Sheikh Abdul Halim is a 
leading exponent of Sophism in modern times, and was known among his followers as the Ghaz ali 
of Egypt. He was an eminent scholar, well respected in  Egypt  and worldwide. I am proud to have 
had him as my mentor and to have received his special attention while still an undergraduate at  Al-
Azhar  University.  
Notwithstanding his erudition and practical Sophism, when he took upon himself to publish a 
new version of the  al-Munqidh  he concentrated his attention on a long introduction explai ning the 
theory of Sophism, rather than focusing on the textual evaluation of the prototype version. His 
introduction covers almost 320 pages in comparison to al -Ghaz ali’s original book which has only 
80 pages, excluding the space given to the footnotes.  
Al-Ghaz ali’s name did not appear on the cover and title pages. Its first mention is on  p. 138, 
in the context of his “Fatwa”  quoted in full by the editor. The second is on p. 214 in the context of 
his challenge to the principles of knowledge.  
After the Shei kh’s exhaustive explication of Sophism from its original sources to its modern 
time, he devoted the fifth section of his introduction to al -Ghaz ali and his milieu, pages 269 -323. 
The information given about al -Ghaz ali is based almost entirely on quotations  and soon digresses 
from  al-Munqidh  to Ihyya Ulum al -Din by the same author as an independent subtitle occupying 
33 pages. Nothing is said about the  al-Munqidh . 
It must be noted that there are editorial mistakes in Sheikh Abdul Halim ’s version, which still  
appear in its third edition (Cairo, Dar al -Maarif, 1988). Some editions of al -Munqidh have not 
escaped editorial mistakes/errata, yet are tolerably acceptable. To save time and energy, however, 
it is expedient to turn to the main point of the present work . 
 
Content a nd Value of Al-Munqidh Min Al -Dalal  
 
Al-Munqidh min al -Dalal  is not only the greatest, but the crown of all al -Ghaz ali’s work. It is 
small in size, but as a document is great in scholarly and historical value. It sheds light on al -
Ghaz ali's per sonality and provides unique details about his life, milieu and other related issues.  
Al-Munqidh  does not limit itself to one approach to its subject. It starts from one point and 
aims toward one goal, but explores many roads to this end. This book may be loosely categorized 
as autobiographical, although it was not intended to be an autobiography in the strict sense. Islamic 
literature did not include such a category in the way that it developed in the West. This may be 

because Islam forbids anyone to boast  of his own achievements or to talk about himself. Some 
early biographical information is implied in the philosophical and literary writings of Muslim 
scholars as indicated elsewhere in this introduction, but there is no class of autobiography as such. 
This may be the reason why al -Ghaz ali did not give more information about himself in the book 
under focus. If he had not been bound by the conventions of his time, what fascinating details he 
could have given us.  
The facts that he does give about his own life  are impressive and phrased in a masterly fashion 
and highly developed spiritualism. They are scattered in many of his works. If assembled in one 
place they would be enjoyable and rewarding. For example, in  al-Munqidh  he spoke of sophism 
as his last perman ent home, and gave the reasons for preferring it above other systems. In other 
writings he describes how he virtually became a Sufi himself and took the Sufi way and developed 
his experience of sophism.  
Al-Munqidh  has three major dimensions; first, the aut obiographical dimension which is 
indispensable in understanding al -Ghaz ali’s works and milieu; secondly, the psychological and 
intellectual graph which records al -Ghaz ali’s inner experience, intellectual endurance and response 
to the power of the moment; a nd thirdly, investigating the religious and intellectual trends of the 
time and milieu, analyzing and rectifying them from his position as a philosopher and religious 
reformer.  
Al-Ghaz ali wrote  al-Munqidh min al -Dalal  at the age of fifty. The precise date of this book is 
not written, but it is not impossible to identify. He wrote it between 499 A.H./1105 A.D.) and 500 
A.H./1106 A.D., about five or six years before his death. This in itself indicates that al -Ghaz ali 
was very active up to the very end of his life. 
So far as is known to scholarship, it is the last of his long life ’s work. It is therefore not 
surprising that it encapsules all aspects of his spiritual and intellectual experience and output. 
Therefore, it is full of re -capitulatory references epit omizing his major works. In essence, it is the 
flower and fruit of his journey in his short life span.  
In 1842  al-Munqidh  was discovered and translated into French for the first time by Augste 
Schmolders. The book itself bears two titles. The first is  Al-Munqidh min al -Dalal wa al -Mufsih 
an al -Ahwal . (The Deliverance from Error and the Revealer of the  Mystical States of the Soul). 
The second is  Al-Munqidh min al -Dalal wal Muwassil ila Dhil Izza wal Jalal (The Deliverance 
from Error and the Deliverer to t he Possessor of  Power and Glory).  
There is good reason to believe that these titles were concurrent. In his book,  Hayy Ibn 
Yaqzan  (Cairo, Subayh, 1978, p. 9), Ibn Tufayl (d. 581 A.H./1185 A.D.) refers to  al-
Munqidh  under the first of the two long titles wi th an insignificant variant of the preposition -- 
using  bi in place of  ann. The two different forms of the title both sta rt with “Deliverance from 
Error” , showing that al -Ghaz ali himself had experienced the confusion of being wrong, or rather 
had been part  of a society in error. He was exploring the way to set his foot on the right path, 
looking for the kind of character which would choose the right path. We may ask why al -Ghaz ali 
chose to call his book " Deliverance from Error". The Prophet Mu hammad (Peace be upon him) 
says, "I have left two things for you. If you take hold of them you will never go astray. They are 
the book of Allah and my  sunnah  (i.e. my example)."  
First there are some points to raise about the title which appears in two forms. One is  Al-
Munqidh min al -Dalal wa al -Mufsih an al -Ahwal  (What Saves from Error and Displays the States 
[of the Soul]). The other is  Al-Munqidh min al -Dalal wa al -Muwassil ila Dhi al -Izza wa al -
Jalal  (What Saves from Error and Unites with the Possessor of Power and Gl ory).  

The two different forms of the title both start with "Deliverance from Error", showing that al -
Ghaz ali himself had experienced the confusion of being wrong, or rather had been part of a society 
in error. He was exploring the way to set his foot on th e right path, looking for the kind of character 
which would choose the right. We may ask why al -Ghaz ali chose to call his book "Deliverance 
from Error". The Prophet Muhammad (Peace be upon him) says, "I have left two things for you. 
If you take hold of the m you will never go astray. They are the book of Allah and my example."  
There is no doubt that al -Ghaz ali knew this  Hadith  and had strong faith in the Qur'an and 
the sunnah . Eminent scholars such as Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Abu al -Hassan al -Ashari had guided 
people along this path and had formulated the Muslim articles of faith. The phrase "deliverance 
from error" might be applied to their teaching; how, then, did al -Ghaz ali choose it for his own 
book? Al -Ghaz ali certainly did not propose his book as a substitu te for the Qur'an and Sunnah. 
Close reading of his book reveals that there is no true guidance outside the book of Allah and the 
life of the Prophet Muhammad (Peace be upon him). But we should read his book in the context 
of the society of his time. Corrup tion was rampant, as were secular claims and theories, sectarian 
arguments, underground movements and false ideas dressed in Islamic clothing. Al -Ghaz ali 
prepared to attack all these elements by approaching them in their own way, using their own 
methods. H is aim was to set up a model and criteria for testing other theories. Titles of other books 
by him reflect this approach -- they included "The criteria . . .", "The way to measure . . .", "The 
straight path . . ." and so on.  
From al -Ghaz ali's title and int roduction here we note that first, he emphasizes that he lived in 
a time of error, his society was going astray, especially those who claimed to be scholars eminent 
in religious studies; his age was in urgent need of a savior to deliver them from error. Th is was 
perhaps the reason why al -Ghaz ali wrote his book, to emphasize two points at one and the same 
time: his credibility as a person to lead the people from destruction to a pure life and a strong faith, 
and at the same time to show the method of deliver ance. Secondly, we note that al -Ghaz ali 
explained spiritual and intellectual corruption and psychological maladies as resulting from 
ignorance and blind conformity. Thirdly, Muslim society at the time of al -Ghaz ali was divided 
into many sects. The most persistent and damaging was the Batinyya teaching, which presented a 
threat to the Muslim Caliph and his officials. They aimed not merely to spread their doctrine, but 
to assassinate the major figures among their oppo nents. Nizam al -Mulk and Fakhr al -Mulk, the 
ministers who were al -Ghaz ali's patrons, were assassinated by them.  
The book comprises an introduction and eight main topics. The addressee in al -Ghaz ali’s 
customary  khutba , introduction, is not directly mentione d and some scholars think that it is 
properly a generic salutation. But close reading of data at our disposal gives the strong impression, 
if not a real clue or a clear allusion, that the addressees were either Abd al -Farisi his biographer 
(al-Subki,  Tabaq at al-Shafiiyya , Cairo, vol. 3, p. 137), or Abu Bakr Ibn al -Arabi (d. 543 A.H./1148 
A.D.), who evidently had met al -Ghaz ali shortly before he embarked on the writing of  al-
Munqidh  (al-Awasim min al -qawasim , Algeria, vol. 1, p. 30). A little -known fact abou t al-
Munqidh  is that al -Ghaz ali states in his introduction that he wrote the work at the request of a 
brother in faith who asked him to reveal the sciences, the evil, and the depths of the schools of 
thought. What prevails with most scholars is that it was  meant for a type of reader, and not for a 
particular individual. This vast majority, beating around the bush, have come nearer to the point 
but have fallen short of grasping it.  
In brief, we can summarize al -Ghaz ali’s meaningful introduction in two cardin al points. First 
and foremost, from the earliest stage of his life, al -Ghaz ali had been known as a fearless, sagacious, 
uncompromising seeker after truth. Secondly, al -Ghaz ali’s time was an epoch of vigorous 

intellectual activity and spiritual fecundity, s o much so that for the average Muslim layman the 
controversies and sectarian cerebral confrontations resulted in little more than a welter of 
confusion and perplexities. For this very reason,  al-Munqidh  offered itself as means of provoking 
intellectual imp etus and kindling spiritual intuition, to the end of pronouncing sentence on faulty 
sects.   
 
Renown   
 
Through Western translations and scholarship on  al-Munqidh , al-Ghaz ali is well -known to the 
scholars and reformers as a magnanimous, indefatigable and inexhaustible source of inspiration 
and impetus in exploring the higher realm of learning and scholarship. Some of al -Ghaz ali’s works 
were translated into Latin, e.g., his boo k al-Iqtisad fil Itiqad in the Middle Ages and later into 
several modern European languages. Hardly do we find a book on Islamic civilization without 
reference to al -Ghaz ali. A good number of orientalists have produced several works of outstanding 
value on his life and milieu. Many others have dealt with al -Ghaz ali within the scope of their 
writings and research. The output of the crop of orientalist writings on al -Ghaz ali is so voluminous 
as to defy classification in our present work. Baron Caradivo, e.g., wrote a book on al -Ghaz ali, 
(tran. into. Arabic by A. Ziatar [Cairo: al -Halabi, 1950]) in which he explored the real position of 
the author of  al-Munqidh  in Sufi literature and practices. He noted that " al-Munqidh  is a great 
psychological document of al -Ghazali’s time . . . ."  
D.B. Macdonald summed up the significance of al -Ghaz ali and the pioneering role he played 
in Muslim thinking in four main points. First, he discarded empty abstract scholastics and dogmas, 
and substituted them with direct contact with  the Qur ’an and Sunnah (tradition). Secondly, he laid 
emphasis on the fear of Allah by urging moral rectitude and to avoid the punishment of hell. 
Thirdly, it was he more than any other that established Islam on a firm and assured ground. 
Fourthly, he brou ght philosophy and theology within the grasp of the ordinary mind. (See  Aspects 
of Islam  [New York Books for Libraries Press, 1971], pp. 36, 139, 194, 196 -201; also  The Life of 
al-Ghaz ali, JAOS 20 [1899], pp. 70 -133.) This statement sounds scholarly but ca nnot pass without 
comment. Regarding the first point, it is absolutely correct that al -Ghaz ali brought the message of 
the Qur ’an and Sunnah to ordinary life in clearer insight and practicality, i.e., from the ivory tower 
of scholasticism to the tangible an d palpable reality of religion. To establish this al -Ghaz ali had to 
wrestle with exponents of sectarian thinking and speculative theologians and jurists.  
Concerning MacDonald ’s second point it is worth noting that al -Ghaz ali, through emphasizing 
the import ance and effect of the fear of Allah, also emphasized, on the other hand, the importance 
of hope in salvation. In his own simile, “Hope and fear are like two ways by which one can fly and 
attain the divine satisfaction and solace. They are like two mounts on which every steep ascent of 
the paths of the next world is traversed. ” 
A deeper insight of al -Ghaz ali’s literature on fear is that the fear of the creator leads to an even 
greater hope in Him; and hope alone, without fear, cannot lead to bliss and parad ise. Fear is a 
natural propensity without which, man cannot attain his equilibrium.  
Indeed, it is true that al -Ghaz ali’s analysis of fear is more elaborate than that of hope, and that 
he devoted a great deal of his book to it. This is partly because of his  belief that fear has the greater 
relevance in the contemporary situation, but it is also accounted for by its place in al -Ghaz ali’s 
Gnostic or mystical themes, and its importance for his theology of which predestination is the 
cornerstone. To our Imam fea r is well connected with the knowledge of God: when knowledge of 
God is perfected, the majesty of fear and the conflagration of the heart are produced. Then the 

trace of conflagration rushes from the heart to the body and behavior ( ibid., p. 27). It is per haps 
because of this mode of writing that Malise Ruthven sees in al -Ghaz ali’s writings a sense of 
sadness and seriousness; he says, “Ghaz ali’s work lays down the role of an earnest, somewhat 
joyless religiosity, pregnant with  gravitas  and unleavened by humor ” (Islam in the 
World  [London: Penguin Books, 1991], p. 241). To illustrate this, he refers to the 
following  hadith  cited by al -Ghaz ali in his book  al-Ihyaa, “ The man who speaks a word to make 
his friends laugh is thereby hurled into the  pit of hell f or seventy years.”  
In his book,  Islam  p. 94, H.A.R. Gibb, says that al -Ghaz ali, “is a man who stands on a level 
with Augustine and Luther in religious insight and intellectual vigor.”  Yet in our view, he stands 
head and shoulders above them since he is mor e universal than restricting himself to one creed.  
To Ignaz Goldzihir al -Ghaz ali, “is one of the m ost epoch -making personalities.”  
In his contribution to  Religion in the Middle East: Sufism , Martin Lings holds al -Ghaz ali as 
the most famous among those Sufi s who had bridged the chasm between Sufism and the rest of 
the Islamic community. Lings says, “Al-Ghaz ali . . . the great Shafi ’i canonist and theologian who 
devoted his latter years to mystic paths and who wrote an autobiographical treatise,  The Savior 
from Error  (al-Munqidh min al -Dalal ) in praise of Sufism as the only sure antidote to skepticism 
and as the highest way to life ” (vol. II, p. 264).  
To Montogomery Watt who has translated  al-Munqidh  together with B idayat al -Hidaya into 
English, “ Al-Ghaz ali is one of the Muslim thinkers, though, per haps over -esteemed in the West.”  
The reason in Watt ’s statement that the Westerners find it easier to be sympathetic with him 
requires more explanation. Certainly, al -Ghaz ali deserves to be loved and appeals to all w ho have 
noble and fair minds. Watt himself nuanced his statement as appears in his article on al -Ghaz ali in 
the new edition of the  Islamic Encyclopedia . 
Referring to the appeal of  al-Munqidh , Watt stated there that “ this again is largely due to the 
charm of his  apologia pro vita sua , entitled  Deliverance from Error , which he completed two or 
three years before his death in December 1111. To fill out our understanding of the Islamic world 
up to 1100 it is well worth looking more closely at al -Ghaz ali.” In his work the  Deliverance from 
Error , al-Ghaz ali relates how, after a period of skepticism, he resolved to make an active research 
for ultimate (religious) truth among the rational theologians, the philosophers, the Batinites (i.e., 
Ismailites) and the Sufis  or mystics ( The Majesty That Was Islam  [London: Sidwhich and Jackson, 
1974], p. 252f).  
Richard Joseph McCarthy who brought out another translation of  al-Munqidh  holds  al-
Munqidh  as unique in whole classical Arabic and Islamic literature. But McCarthy doub ts whether 
this outstanding book is the first of its kind. Al -Ghaz ali’s originality in  al-Munqidh  is in the great 
tradition of Muslim autobiography or quasi -biographical literature. It is true that before al -Ghaz ali, 
Ibn Hazm al -Andalusi wrote his  Ring of the Dove , Tuq al -Hamama  and al-Akhlaq wa Siyar , in 
which he provided much autobiographical information. This can be taken in one way or another 
as internal evidence that al -Ghaz ali was influenced by Ibn Hazm in this field. Ibn Sina, and al -
Farabi before al -Ghaz ali both had written a large amount of autobiographical material. (Ibn Ab i 
Usibi'a Vyunal -Anba, vol. 3, pp. 3 -29 and 223 -233.) It is to be noted that autobiography is not an 
independent Islamic genre or branch of knowledge.  
The rhetoric and genre of a l-Ghaz ali in al-Munqidh  was favorably compared with that of the 
English academic theologian and activist, John Henry Newman, of the nineteenth century Oxford 
movement. Though Frick more cautiously refers to it as an  apologia pro doctrina sua , McCarthy 
still thinks that  al-Munqidh  possesses its own uniqueness for reasons which are self -evident and 
self-proclaimed.  

As to McCarthy ’s own translation, it is accompanied by a long and useful introduction about 
al-Ghaz ali and al-Munqidh , and with appendices and ann otations. The introduction is sixty pages, 
the translation fifty -three pages, the annotations of twenty -eight pages, and the indispensable 
appendices stretch from p. 145 to p. 297 of the book containing a translation of other works by al -
Ghaz ali mentioned in the book.  
McCarthy ’s annotations are useful for lay readers and non -academics. They introduce some 
biographical information about the personalities mentioned in  al-Munqidh . In some instances 
McCarthy overburdens the text with comments which a re merely superficial. Most of the time he 
refers the reader to secondary sources. McCarthy attempts to refer the  hadith  to their original 
source, but often fails, e.g., he misinterpreted the  hadith  concerning the Muslim sects in a way that 
contradicts the  original. Sometimes the notes complicate, rather than elucidate.  
McCarthy worked intensively on Jabri and Burgi ’s translation (e.g., vide p. xxlx) and utilized 
to a certain extent the available translations of  al-Munqidh , including those in Dutch and Turk ish. 
He specifically mentioned Field ’s and Watt ’s translations.  
He based his translation on the Arabic text printed by Jamil Salibah and Kamel Ayyad, which 
was used also for Jabrie ’s French translation and Watt's translation. Notwithstanding all this, he 
perused the Shahid Ali Basha ’s manuscript dated 509 A.H. (1115 -1116 A.D.) i.e. five years after 
al-Ghaz ali's death, which we have also used in our translation together with another good, yet 
incomplete manuscript (Taymur, Bash, Egypt -National Library).  
For the first time, I am introducing my edition of  al-Munqidh  in its Arabic original; the 
translation here is based on my own edition.  
This translation, though not the first one, certainly is the first by a Muslim who stands very 
close to al -Ghaz ali’s personal ity and spirit. The translation, it is hoped, reads smoothly and carries 
much of al -Ghaz ali’s style, warmth and stamina in the sphere of learning and truth.   
  

Editor's Introduction  
George F. Mc Lean 
 
 
The Context   
 
In order to understand a person's life it  is usually helpful to know something of his or her 
social, political and cultural contexts. How important this is depends, on the one hand, upon 
theoretical considerations and, on the other hand, upon the person him or herself. The theoretical 
issue is th e extent to which a person is understood in term of interiority vis -à-vis in terms of 
openness and relation to others. Indeed, deep reflection suggests that the degree of one's interiority 
and reflective self -possession is the key to one's ability to relat e to others with that free and 
passionate sense of justice which is the fruit of love.  
 This is important for a personal history. Without this balanced sense of the person, on the one 
hand, a life would be interpreted simply in terms of external events or powerful political 
authorities, in relation to whose concerns the individual is but a marionette. Worse still, any claim 
to personal and free decision making would be interpreted as fraud or deceit. On the other hand, 
that same life could be interpreted in  a simply self -reflective manner, reducing it to egoistic self -
seeking, missing its social concern and impact, and -- even more -- losing the significance of 
personal and religious interiority for the life of society as a whole.   
All of this is especially true in the concrete case of Ghaz ali who lived at the center of an 
intensely religious culture, the understanding and development of which was his central concern 
and major accomplishment. D.B. MacDonald described him as "the greatest, certainly the most 
sympathetic figure in the history of Islam, and the only teacher of the after generations ever put by 
a Muslim on a level with the four great Imams." For W.M. Watt "al -Ghaz ali has sometimes been 
claimed in both East and West as the greatest Muslim after Muh ammad, and he is by no means 
unworthy of that dignity." To H.A.R. Gibb he was "a man who stands on a level with Augustine 
and Luther in religious insight and intellectual vigor."1   
In this light the socio -political, indeed the geo -cultural context, can be seen in its true 
importance. To do this it is helpful to take up the suggestion of Marshal G. Hodgson, at the 
beginning of the first volume of his  The Venture of Islam: Conscience and  History in a World 
Civilization.2 He argues effectively that to understa nd not only Islam but world civilization it is 
necessary to break free from Eurocentrism. One must appreciate that in the Middle Ages the central 
drama of world civilization was not being played out in the small kingdoms of Western 
and Southern Europe. Rat her it consisted in the emergence of Islam in confrontation 
with Byzantium  to the East, from the Nile to the  Oxus, where the Irano -Semitic culture is found. 
In this context, the  Roman Empire  and Western Christianity is put in perspective in relation to the  
importance of the emergence of Islam to the East.   
Prior to Ghaz ali Islam had undergone an explosive development. In the century after the life 
of the Prophet Muhammad 570 -632 A.D., it expanded with remarkable swiftness across Africa 
to Spain  in the West and far to the East within 100 years of the Prophet. The unity of religious and 
social authority in Muhammad and in the Islamic community faced heavy challenges during the 
second century of Islam when the spiritual authority of the Caliph was submerged by the military, 
and hence political, power of the Sultans. The early orthodox Caliphate of Uthmân and others was 
succeeded by the Umayyad caliphate and this, in turn, by the 'Abb asid caliphate. It was during the 

later, declining period of this caliphate that  Ghaz ali lived (1058 -1111 A.D., or the years 450 -505 
A.H. counting from Muhammad's Hegira or trek from  Mecca  to Medinà).  
 The guard of the Abbasid Caliphs, which was drawn from foreign, especially Turkish, 
elements assumed the real political power. They we re replaced by the Persian Buwayhides from 
945-1055, who were replaced in turn for a century by the Turkish Seljoukides, when the Caliph 
al-Qa'im, recognized Toghrul Beg as Sultan in  Baghdad. This began a line which for a century 
would rule the vast expans e from the Mediterranean to  Afghanistan.  
 During this time, which was that of Ghaz ali, a strong attempt was underway by the Fatmides 
of Egypt to supplant the sunnite Abbasid Caliphs in order to assume the religious and political 
leadership of all Islam. Cl aiming to be descendents of Ali, successor of Muhammad, and Fatima, 
his daughter, they brought together the shi'ite Alides and conquered North Africa, 
where  Cairo  became their capital. Their intent was to dominate  Iraq, Syria, Khor asam and the 
entire Abbas id empire. To this end Hassan b Sabb ah, founder of  Batinism ta'lim ite, a new form of 
Ismaélism, sent emissaries against the sunnite Moslems.   
Among these there were assassins whose most famous victims were Nizam al -Mulk, Wazir to 
Sultan Maliksh ah, and his son, Fakhr al -Mulk. It had been the custom of the learned Nizam al -
Mulk to have among his court a group of famous jurists and theologians. By teaching Shafé'ism 
and Ash'ariam they provided a counterforce against the Schi'ism of the F atimides in favor of th e 
sunnite Abbasids and the Seljoukides. To this end he founded many schools, led by that 
in Baghdad. It was precisely as director of this school that he appointed al -Ghaz ali in 484/1091. 
In the religio -political complex of Islam at that time, this was the critical post.   
 
Life of Ghazali  
 
The earliest biography of Ghaz ali is by 'Abd al -Ghafir al -Farisi3 who knew personally 
"Muhammad son of Muhammad son of Muhammad Abã H amid al -Ghaz ali." He was born in Tãs 
(450/1058) and began his studies in  fiqh (Islamic la w) there in the  school  of Radkana. Hence, he 
moved to Forj an under Abu'l -Qasim al -Isma'îli. Finally he became an outstanding student at 
Nîsh apãr under, among others, al -Juwayne', sunnite Im am al-uramayn. His studies included law, 
jurisprudence, dialectics,  religion and logic, reading works on hikma and fal asifa. 
 After some time he experienced some distaste for the abstract sciences and turned toward the 
Sufi religious approach under F aramdh i, (died 477), one of the most famous shaykhs of the time. 
Though h e followed the religious practices of cult and ejaculatory prayer and overcame the 
obstacles, he did not achieve the religious experiences he sought, so he returned then to the abstract 
sciences.  
 In epistemology he held all proofs to be equally valid, whi ch left him bemired in casuistry: a 
brilliant dilettante, but without bases for certitude regarding the three great truths, namely, the 
existence of God, the last judgment, and prophecy.  Fiqh  does not justify these fundamental beliefs, 
but supposes them. G hazali excelled in reasoning ( anzar ) and argumentation and early began to 
write his own works. But this dilettantism may have been the reason why his famous teacher al -
Juwayne came to be somewhat put off by the brilliant but aggressive argumentation of his  student.  
 Upon the deaths of F aramdh i and of al -Juwayn in 478, his education was complete. He was 
the sole major heir to the cultural tradition of his native Khor asan, which excelled in both thought 
and Sufi religious experience. Soon he joined Niz am Al -Mulk at his 'Askar or military -political 
base. There he brought together in brilliant discussion the many visiting leading ulemas, imams 

and men of letters so that his fame spread widely. At 34 he was appointed by Niz am head of the 
Nizamiyya  School  in Baghd ad which he led with great distinction 484 -488 (1091 -1095).  
 At the beginning he was still the brilliant dilettante. Later, from the position of a mature 
wisdom and holiness, he would apologize for the arrogance with which he pursued argumentation 
in that earlier less mature period, when his search was too centered upon honor and fame.   
Farisi reports that at the Niz amiyya he undertook important study in three major directions. 
He researched the science of the roots or sources of jurisprudence ( 'ilm al -usãl); he redeveloped 
the school  of Shafi'ite jurisprudence; and he carried out al-khilaf or comparative jurisprudence. On 
all of these he wrote works and acquired a surpassing fame and an entourage.  
 This attention to sciences concerned with the concrete and t he practical,4 suggests Jabre, gave 
him the illusion of standing on solid ground and contributing to the realization and defence of a 
human -divine kingdom in this life. He had joined Niz am al-Mulk in his battle against the threat 
of Ta'limism  as a new form  of shi'ite b atinism which stressed the essential importance of the 
teaching of the Immam in a different line of succession which went back to very early Muslim 
times.   
This effort received a shattering blow on 10 Ramadan 485/1092 when Niz am al-Mulk, Wazir  
or Prime Minister of the Seljoukide Sultan and patron of Ghaz ali, was assassinated by a young 
Batinite, as would be  the son of Niz am, Fakhr al -Mulk, in 500/1107 fifteen years later.   
According to abã Bakr ibn'al -'Arab i it was early the next year (486/1093 -1904) that al Ghaz ali 
made a definitive conversion to Sufism and turned from the sciences of things here below to those 
of the hidden, transcendent aspects of religion. The character and content of this conversion is the 
centerpiece of the  Munqidh . It is no exaggeration to say that all else in the book has been chosen 
and ordered precisely in order to explain that conversion and the new dimension of knowledge 
which was opened to him by the Way of the Sufis.  
 It is not possible to say what weight the politi cal facts of his day, particularly the assassination 
of Niz am, had on the conversion of Ghaz ali. He himself does not refer to them in the  Munqidh . 
There he holds to the description of the alternate orders of knowledge or of religion proposed by 
others and to his own thorough investigation and critique of them. By their exclusion he points to 
the Way of the Sufis. This was based not simply on its being the sole remaining speculative 
alternative, but also on the distinction of theory and practice and its impl ication that it was 
necessary to move beyond speculation to a higher level of experience. This experience provides 
its own positive warranty.  
 Some would want to hold only to his own spiritual experience and suggest that the fear which 
he mentions at this time was not fear of a fate similar to that of Niz am, but fear of God, which is 
the beginning of wisdom.5 This would seem to separate Ghaz ali from the circumstances of his 
time in which -- if one recognizes the role of sunnite vs shi'ite theology as the co ordinating matrices 
of the conflicting temporal regimes of the time -- he was centrally engaged.  
 Further, this position separates violently soul from body to focus entirely upon disincarnate 
mind. But it is no derogation of the soul and its spiritual journey to place it firmly in matter or 
body, in time or history. That one learns true values by reflecting on the death of others or upon 
the circumstances which threaten one's life is as common an occurrence as taking part in a burial 
or even visiting a hospital. It is then not surprising that his earlier attempt to practice Sufism was 
taken up once again with a renewed vigor by Ghaz ali. His sincerity in this is testified by the decade -
long ascetic retreat which he would soon take up and which he would ne ver really abandon.  
 In the  Munqidh  he writes at length on a long debate within himself about making a definitive 
break with his present life of honor and adulation by students and leaders. Did this begin from the 

death of Niz am or, as would seem more prob able, had it begun before, been catalyzed by the death 
of Niz am, and come to a conclusive decision in 486 AH. If so was the subsequent time 
in Baghdad  concerned only with tactics for carrying out his decision to leave his post there.  
 At any rate, in 488/1 095 he left Baghdad as part of a plan to definitively abandon his post 
there and the country as a whole, but letting on only that he intended to make the pilgrimage to 
Mecca. He wandered as a hermit in  Damascus,  Jerusalem,Hebron  (and possibly  Alexandria) f or 
nearly two years. During that time he made the 489/1095 -1096, pilgrimage to  Mecca. Ibn'al -'Arab i 
reports seeing him in  Baghdad  in Jum ada 489/1095 -1096, engaged in teaching, investigating the 
doctrines of the philosophers and writing. If he is correct ab out that date, later that year Ghaz ali 
made a definitive break from  Baghdad. By 491, or 492/1094 at the latest, he returned to his home 
in Tãs where he lived a life of prayer, worship, meditation and study.  
 This retreat lasted some ten years when the son of Niz am al-mulk, Fakhr al -Mulk, who was 
trying to lay down a firm line of defence against  Batinism ta'limite  summoned him to return once 
again to his earliest teaching post at Nîsh apur. 
 At this point, Ghaz ali reports, he was coming to the conclusion that , due to the pervasive 
corruption in society, interior prayer was not enough; to it the work of teaching must be added. 
The invitation added an external impetus to his interior inclinations, and he took up his teaching 
once again in 499/1106. This was to b e of short duration, for the following year Fakhr al -Mulk too 
was assassinated. Soon Ghaz ali returned to his home in Tãs. There at the side of his home he built 
a school for teaching  fiqh, which always had been his main area of teaching, as well as a Sufi 
monastery for those in search of prayer, spiritual learning and ascetic practice. Ghaz ali himself 
undertook for the first time intensive study of  hadith or the traditions regarding the prophet. He 
continued writing till his very last days and passed away o n Monday 14 Jum ada II, 505.  
 
Works   
 
The writings of Ghaz ali, like that of many great thinkers of his day, are very vast, both in 
breadth and in overall length. A few notes on the categories of his works might convey some sense 
of their scope.6  
 1. The Islamic Sciences of fiqh and  Kalam: fiqh was the center of his teaching and some of 
his writing in this field remain classics to the present day. On  Kalam his only work is  al-Iqtiad fi 
l-I'tiqad (The Golden Mean of  Belief), which is a fine summary of its m ain theological questions. 
He seemed to place little trust in  Kalam or apologetic theology. Indeed, his very last work 
was Iljam al-'Awamm 'an al -khaw fi 'Ilm al -Kalam (Restricting the Masses from Engaging in the 
Science of Kalam).  
2. Against B atinism : com batting B atinism, especially the Ta'l imites, was a major political and 
cultural campaign of the time. Ghaz ali played a central role in the intellectual dimension of this 
effort by his teaching and through a number of sharply written works.  
3. Philosophy : Ghazali speaks of the need to understand thoroughly the ideas of philosophy 
and in  Maqaid al-Falasifa (The Aims of the Philosophers -- Intentiones Philosophorum ) produced 
a classic summary of Greek logic, physics and metaphysics as presented by the Islamic 
philosophers of his day. The work was much used in the Middle Ages, especially in the West, as 
a definitive handbook of philosophy. However, Ghaz ali's intent i n the work was to lay there the 
groundwork for the decisive attack on philosophy which he carried out in  Tahafut al -Falasifa (The 
Incoherence of the Philosophers; Destructio Philosophorum ). Despite Averroes's reply in  Tahafut 

al-Tahafut some decades later,  Ghaz ali succeeded in quite marginalizing philosophy, especially in 
Sunnite Islam, and thereby terminating the tradition of Islamic work in Greek philosophy.  
 The Munqidh  min al -Dalal, the center of concern here, is a semi -autobiographical work. 
Through a tour of the intellectual horizons of the day, it leads the reader to Sufism as the only sure 
access to truth.   
The title used here is a combination of two titles:  Munqidh min al -Dalal wa l'mufi 'an al -
Ahwal (What Saves from Error and Unveils the [ Mystical]  States [of the Soul]) and  al-Munqidh 
min al -Dalal wa l -Muwassil il a Dhi l -'Izza wu l -Jalal (What Saves from Error and Unites with 
Power and Glory).  
 4. Spiritual Guidance : The  Iya' 'Ulém al Din  (The Revitalization of the Sciences of  Religion) 
is his great  spiritual work. Where the  Munqidh  leads one to the  Sufi Way, this work enters into 
detail in describing what is discovered as one proceeds along this Way -- the savored experience 
itself, of course, remaining beyond words. The  Ihya is composed of four par ts, each having ten 
books. Part I begins with a book on knowledge which is followed by books on "The Five Pillars 
of Islam", i.e., the profession of belief, the canonical prayers, almsgiving, fasting and pilgrimage. 
Part II concerns ' adat, or ways of actin g regarding food, marriage, etc. Part III treats  al-
muhlik at (the things that lead to damnation). It begins with a psychological masterpiece on the 
mysteries of the heart and follows with books on ascetical practices for overcoming the appetites. 
Part IV c oncerns  al-munjiy at (the things that lead to salvation) and constitutes his spiritual 
masterpiece. It treats repentance, gratitude, fear, hope, poverty, love, openness to God, spiritual 
awareness, the review of conscience, meditation, death and the next li fe. All this is written with 
such great beauty that McCarthy cites an ancient author to the effect that "the Iya would supply for 
all Islamic literature if the latter were to be lost" for it conveys "all that is best and most appealing 
in Islam as a religion and as a 'revelation' of God's love for man and the heights attainable by man's 
love for God."7  
 
Analysis o f Al-Munqidh  Min Al -Dalal  
 
The Work   
 
Al Ghaz ali wrote the  Munqidh  between 499/110 and 500/1107 in Nisph apér. He was fifty 
years old at the time and about to return to teaching. As a personal testimony it calls to mind 
Augustine's  Confessions , Descartes'  Discourse on Method  and Newman's  Apologia pro vita sua . 
Its complex intellectual structure and purpose makes it one of the most outstanding works in world 
literature. Al Ghaz ali states in the introduction that he wrote the work at the request of a brother in 
the faith who asked him "to reveal . . . the purpose of the sciences, the evil and the depths of the 
schools of thought." This could be a  real account and/or a literary device; in any case, most agree 
that it was meant for a type of reader, not for only one individual. The work is intended to explain 
how he first established the bases and limits of reason, and later broke beyond reason to f ind the 
Way to definitive certitude and spiritual fulfillment. By a process of exclusion his review of the 
competencies and limits of  kalam, of philosophy and of the doctrine of the ta`limites led him to 
Sufism. There he found the Way which could take him to the prophetic light beyond what "there 
was no other light on the face of the earth."8   
Proximately, he was worried by the B ainites who wished to propose, as an infallible Imam, 
the Fatimid Caliph of Cairo. Ghaz ali considered this prerogative to have bel onged only to 
Muhammad himself. Like the Ash'ari facing the Mu'tazilites two centuries earlier, he was forced 

to rethink for himself and his contemporaries sunnite dogma, and thereby to renew the religious 
spirit. It was, moveover, a task which it had been  prophesied would be needed at the beginning of 
each century.  
 To appreciate this project it may be helpful to look first at its structure, especially as analyzed 
by Farid Jabre,9 and then to consider its meaning and accomplishment.   
 
General Introduction  (pp. 63)   
 
Ghaz ali notes that from his early youth, before the age of 20, he had been concerned with the 
problem of certitude and had examined critically all the roads leading not only to religious 
conviction, but even to nihilism. Rather than acceptthe ea sy but blind conformism of  taqlid, 
however, he attempted to seize the deep basic reality of things, especially of human nature itself 
as it opened to the divine. In this regard what he sought was certain knowledge, which he described 
as a state of soul so bound to, and satisfied by, its object that nothi ng could detach it therefrom.   
 
The First Crisis: Sophistry and Denail of  All Knowledge  (pp. 66)   
 
In search of this perfect certitude he turned first to sense knowledge but soon recognized the 
illusions it generated. When he turned to reason and its first principles, however, he had difficulty 
distinguishing their certitude from that which he had experienced in dreams; indeed for the Sufis 
the whole of this life was a dream. After two months of despair with regard to knowledge he 
regained confidence in the directives of reason. This confidence, however, came not as a clear 
deduction from any methodical reasoning, but by light which God projected into his heart.   
 
Evaluation of Other Ways  (p. 70)   
 
Long after -- his education having been completed, and now at the head of the school 
at Baghdad  -- he returned once again to this issue of certitude. Now, however, it was not merely 
the general question of how certitude could be had in any reasoning, rather it was ho w one could 
be bound irrevocably in blessed union with God. As truth is sought by four different groups each 
proposing its own path, some time after 484/1091 and over a period of years at Baghdad Ghaz ali 
set about studying each in depth to see which provid ed the true Way to God.   
1. Kalam: (pp. 71) Through the Prophet God revealed the body of true beliefs upon which 
depends man's happiness in this life and the next. Because some deny this and attempt to disturb 
the faith of the believers, an apologetic appr oach (the kalam) was developed. This seeks to argue 
from premises which these unbelievers do admit in order to show the contradictions into which 
they are lead by their unbelief.  Kalam is of little service, however, for it can serve only those with 
a strong  sense of the first and necessary principles of reason, but generally these persons limit their 
convictions solely to such principles. In time  kalam broadened its concerns to search into the deep 
reality of things through the use of such philosophical cate gories as substance and accidents, but 
it could attain little sure knowledge.   
2. Falasifa: (pp.73) Thinking that this had never seriously been studied, in Baghdad Ghaz ali 
spent two years reading the works of the Fal asifa and a third in organizing his thou ghts. He divided 
the Fal asifa into three categories and quickly rejected the first two: the nihilists ( dahriyyãn ) 
or Zanadiqa who deny the existence of God, and the naturalists (tabi -'iyyun) who believe in a 
powerful and wise being, but reject life after d eath.   

In contrast, he gave extensive attention to the third category, the theists (il ahiyyãn), which 
include especially not only the Greek philosophers, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, but the Islamic 
philosophers, Avicenna and al -Farabi. Ghaz ali does not propose rejecting all their positions: 
mathematics, logic, physics, politics and ethics could be accepted with care and prudence. The 
difficulties of the philosophers come especially in the field of theodicy where they did not have 
success in furnishing th e kinds of proofs demanded by their logic.   
He warns against the dangers in either totally accepting or totally rejecting the philosophers, 
arguing strenuously for an open attitude to truth wherever it appears. Truth is not contaminated by 
being juxtaposed  to errors, nor does it become false when included in books which contain errors 
on other matters. Thus, similarities between revealed truths in his works and elements in the works 
of some philosophers do not render the revealed matters any less true.   
In sum, however,  Falasafa  will not suffice because reason is unable to know the basic truths 
of things, especially (but not only) with regard to the spirit in man and its union with God.   
3. The Theory of  Teaching (pp. 84): A competing claimant to provide a s ure way to God -- 
and one most obtrusive in his day, even to the point of assassinations -- was the company of those 
who claimed that such truth could not at all be approached by reason, but only through instruction 
by a teacher, particularly by the infall ible Imam of the  shi'ites . Ghaz ali proceeded to develop a 
clearer statement of their principles than could they themselves, but he did so in order to refute 
them. He accepted the principles of the  ta'limites  regarding the need for a doctrine and for an 
infallible teacher, but turned this against them by pointing out that such a teacher was only 
Muhammad. More basically, however, he rejected the general skepticism regarding reason implicit 
in their argument and their reduction of faith to blind conformism.   
With regard to the contingent social order Ghaz ali considered error to be always possible, but 
not to have eternal implications. Where teaching has been received from an infallible but now dead 
teacher it should be followed; otherwise jurisprudential judge ment ( ijtihad) must suffice.   
With regard to the fundamental truths of belief, these exist in the  Qur'an and the  Sunna  or 
community. As shown in his book,  The Just Balance, these truths can be argued. But, as was true 
even with Muhammad's teaching, there i s no guarantee that all persons will be convinced.   
Ghaz ali argues that the  ta'limit  position is not consistent, for the authority of any text which 
would affirm the existence and infallibility of their Imam would need to be based on prophecy and 
certified  by miracles. The appreciation and application of such certification, however, requires 
precisely the kind of reasoning capability rejected by that position.   
 
The Mystical Way  of Sufism (pp. 91)   
 
By exclusion he then turned to the way of Sufism which he notes to be both a knowledge and, 
even more fundamentally, a practice which constitutes a yet deeper knowledge. As practice, its 
goal is detachment from all else for the purpose of attachment to God. He attained information and 
some understanding of Sufism  by reading the works of Makki, Muh asibi, Junayd, Shibli and 
Bistami. But he noted that the essence of Sufism was a matter not of knowledge, but of lived 
experience described as savoring the truth.   
Hence he had to reorient himself from an outward search f or objective truth to the realization 
of an inward state of soul; it was not a matter of knowing the definition of detachment, but of 
becoming detached step by step. This spiritual turn was for him a matter of great drama and pain. 
He had always held the t hree great truths: The Existence of God, Prophecy, and Resurrection or 
the Last Day, and had stoutly taught and defended them. But he notes with regret that he had done 

so with attachment to worldly honor, even to the point of treating others harshly. If, however, 
eternal happiness depended not on attachment but on detachment, then he had a crucial choice to 
make: to remain with all the attachments of his life as leader of the school in  Baghdad  or to break 
away.  
 The pressure of the growing awareness of thi s choice progressively paralysed him over a six 
months period beginning from Rajab 488 to the point at which he could neither speak nor eat. At 
that point, by God's help, he was able to make the break. For the rest of his life he led the life of 
prayer. He  was a hermit for two years in  Syria  and Palestine; he notes especially his time in the 
minaret of the mosque in  Damascus. Family cares recalled him once again to his home, which he 
left but briefly to teach at Nîsh apur. But with progressive practice of th e Sufi Way  of self -denial, 
prayer and meditation in Tãs the spirit of God suffused him entirely.   
He recounts the stages of the  Sufi Way  as the purification of the heart of all that is not God 
and total absorption in God through annihilation of Self. Each interior step of the heart is 
accompanied by a corresponding step of knowledge unveiling and contemplating the truth. These 
take one to a proximity with God, but this is not yet the state of inherence or true union. For that 
it is necessary to proceed by l ived, even savored, experience. This has three levels: (1) knowledge 
by faith or belief based on the good opinion one has of one's spiritual masters or teachers; (2) 
indirect knowledge by verification with the help of reasoning; (3) direct knowledge by tas te, which 
he describes as tasted or savored in order to insist upon the subjectivity of an interior appreciation 
of God as present beyond any objective, exterior knowledge.  
 All these levels are permeated by the notion of prophecy; it is the Prophet who ac hieves most 
vividly the direct experience of God which is the goal of the  Sufi Way. Hence at this point he 
undertakes a detailed progressive analysis of the nature of prophecy in order to be as clear as 
possible regarding the reality of the divine union wh ich is both the Way and the truth, both 
knowledge and practice, and, beyond all, life divine.   
 
The Nature of  Prophecy: An Urgent Human Need (pp. 98)   
 
Here Ghaz ali mounts a major effort to communicate to his readers/friends the character of the 
lived expe rience to which the  Sufi Way  leads. He begins with a detailed sequence of the 
development of the various senses, followed by the ability to discern things beyond the sense level 
at seven years of age, and then the ability to grasp abstract notions, i.e. th ings as necessary, possible 
or impossible. Finally, there opens the eye of prophecy which grasps a domain beyond reason. He 
exemplifies the transcendence of this world beyond that of reason by comparing the latter to the 
insensitivity of a blind person bef ore colors or of reason before the world of dreams. This capacity 
of the human for trans -rational experience is a special gift of God.   
He treats three questions regarding prophecy: its possibility, its existence and its realization 
in a particular person.  Its possibility is illustrated by knowledge of the laws of medicine and 
astrology. These are known to be true but are not subject to rational deduction. Moreover, dreams 
testify to the fact of a realm of knowledge beyond reason. Prophetic knowledge exists  in the 
experience which can be developed by following the Way of Sufism.  
 Like knowledge of whether someone is authentically a doctor or jurist, recognition of the 
existence of prophecy in a particular person requires first some sense of the nature of pro phecy. 
This can be had by meeting such persons and considering their teaching and actions. But the life 
of the Prophet is its own best witness. More than external miracles, which upset the laws of nature, 
prophecy is itself a miracle which perfects nature beyond anything to which nature of itself could 

aspire.10 Thus it is by being with Sufis that one comes to know that the higher experience has 
been attained by some and thus that it does exist and can be attained by their Way.   
 
Practical Problems and the Return to  Teaching (pp. 102)   
 
The remainder of the work focuses on the practical problems or difficulties in bringing the 
Way into more general practice.  
In their substance humans are both body and spirit or heart. The later is the proper place of 
knowledge of God, but like the body it too can die if it lacks knowledge of God or falls ill through 
disobedience to Him. What is more, just as the body is healed by medical properties which the 
reason cannot understand, so the heart can be healed by pract ices of cult which only the higher 
experience of the prophet can appreciate.  
 Ghaz ali explained the nature of prophecy by leading the reader step by step toward 
experiences that transcends both the senses and reason. But in order to be attracted toward suc h a 
goal one needs to experience it in others. Here, the difficulty is precisely the bad examples of those 
supposedly learned persons who should be practicing it, or the defects and bad examples of others 
who do attempt to practice the Way. The result is a  general tepidity.   
Ghaz ali responded both in theory and in practice. Regarding theory or truth to those whose 
tepidity is due to:   
 
- ta'limism , as a virus aggressively promoted in his day and proposing passive dependence on 
an infallible Imam, Ghaz ali directs that they read his work:  The Just Balance.  
- the teaching of the  falasifa, who aggressively extend the realm of reason and reduce all else 
in the  Qur'an to mere allegory, Ghaz ali directs that they review his teaching on prophecy as 
transcending the c apacities of reason.  
- the arguments of the libertines, Ghaz ali directs that they read his work,  The Alchemy of 
Happiness . 
- the claim that prophecy is only for the common people, but not for those who can understand 
its contents and develop an empirical e thics ( hakim) based on God, Ghaz ali teaches that in fact 
they reject prophecy because they reduce what is distinctive about it, namely, its transcendence of 
reason, to the level of a sage usage of reason.   
 
But Ghaz ali is conscious that holiness as an inner reality can be betrayed above all from 
within, that those who should exemplify the experiences achieved from the Way in fact may be 
impeded by various temptations and therefore generate scandal rather than constituti ng beacons 
for others. Ghaz ali attempts to protect against this by assuring: (1) that all have knowledge of the 
difference between good and evil and should not be misled by anyone who falls before temptations 
which everyone experiences, and (2) that knowle dge of the Way is itself a corrective for it directs 
one to repent and move on, not to remain in sin.  
 But Ghaz ali had a practical response to make as well. Seeing that tepidity seemed to be 
spreading he became convinced that a strenuous effort at educatio n was needed. He made a last 
effort in that direction by accepting the invitation of the son of Niz am to take charge of the school 
at Nîsh apãr. When this was cut short by the assassination of his patron, he moved his effort to his 
home in Tãs, where he bui lt a school and monastery to teach and promote the practice of Sufism.   
 
 

Meaning of the Munqidh   
 
The above analysis of the structure of the text has attempted closely to follow its structure. 
The text, however, is not simply autobiographical, but a somewhat stylized ordering of the 
elements of his life and hence of his Sufi experience. In this his goal, he says, is to respond to the 
question of the purpose of the related sacred sciences and the evil and depth of the relevant schools 
of thought. Hence , in order further to unfold the import of the  Munqidh  it may help to add here 
some reflections upon the different philosophical issues involved.   
 
Epistemology   
 
The issue of knowledge11 and its competencies is basic here, for his purpose is to show not 
only what reason can do in order progressively to lead toward the Way, but even more what reason 
cannot do in order, through contrast, to make manifest what is distinctive and indispensable in the 
mystical Way of the Sufis. Moreover, beyond the issue of the  way to personal perfection, Ghaz ali's 
understanding of knowledge was the key to his work on  The Incoherence of the Philosophers  
(Tahafut al -Falasifa) which played a central role in the Islamic rejection of its heritage of work on 
the Greek philosophers' c lassic elaboration of reason. This may be related, on the one hand, to the 
troubled history of the relation of religion to the processes of modernization derived from the 
scientific elaboration of reason. On the other hand, it may relate also to the mystic al direction of 
Islamic thought and its potential for contributing to the present renewal of the search for spiritual 
meaning in response to the loss of meaning in our increasingly rationalized society.12   
To see how this can be so one should note with Far id Jabre that while the work was written 
toward the end of Ghaz ali's life its literary point of view is rather that of the period of his leadership 
of the school at  Baghdad. Particularly, it reflects the point at which he comes seriously to 
investigate the  adequacy of the sciences and schools of thought. From this point of view the work 
-- and his life -- clearly divide into two parts: the first is preliminary and is devoted to the basis for 
scientific reasoning, the second main section is devoted to questi oning these bases with a view to 
showing the need, the nature and the goal of the Way of the Sufis.   
Each phase is marked by a personal crisis, the first of which foreshadows the second. 
McCarthy downplays the first as the relatively universal step of the late adolescent forced to take 
up responsibility for his or her own capacity of knowledge.13 In contrast, Jabre,14 as it were, 
places a magnifying glass on this first crisis in order to uncover much more precisely the nature of 
the epistemology which Ghaz ali developed for human reason. This would remain with him 
throughout his life and would be the point of reference against which he would delineate the further 
step to the mystical and the prophetic.  
 Further, because Ghaz ali later notes that he never doubt ed the great truths of the faith, Jabre 
would distinguish this first crisis from Descartes's universal doubt and limit it to the motives of 
credibility of faith before the judgment of reason. But if Descartes could stress the importance of 
keeping one's fu ndamental beliefs even while applying the technique of his methodic doubt,15 the 
young Ghaz ali could claim to have done no less in his own general state of initial confusion.   
Jabre would focus Ghaz ali's early crisis on the rational means or motives which justify belief 
and considers that this defines all that follow. In contrast, Ghaz ali himself seems there to describe 
a more general crisis regarding the validity of reason. This is but an introductory first step toward 
the general epistemological question which he evolves later in the main body of the text. It is there 

that he treats the nature and ability of reason to achieve the real nature, or by spatial analogy, the 
deep reality ( haqiqa or pulp) of things as opposed to merely their surface appearance.  
 To this spatial analogy of levels on the part of the object, there corresponds in Ghaz ali's 
thought a parallel set of levels on the part of the self. The deepest level is the transrational goal of 
the Sufis, but this can be illumined through contrast to th e more surface or preliminary levels, 
which are those of sense and reason that Ghaz ali lists in his section on prophecy. Let us attempt a 
more precise delineation of his notion of reason; by contrast this could provide insight not only 
into his perception of the nature of the goal of the mystical Way, but also into the limitation of the 
sciences. Through the  Tahafut this forces the break of the subsequent Islamic tradition from its 
earlier work in the Greek tradition.   
In Aristotle's logic, which ruled his development of the structure of the sciences, all begins 
from first principles such as that of non -contradiction first sketched out by Parmenides. These have 
absolute and universal value from the beginning of the work of reason. In this light, by a process  
of induction from the particular to the universal, the natures of things are abstracted and with these 
the deductive syllogism is constructed in the various sciences, each with their distinctive universal 
principles.  
Jabre suggests that Ghaz ali took only the form of such syllogistic reasoning (via the 
Arab  qiyas ), and into this poured a quite different content. This was not simply the results of 
induction from concrete sense experience, even in the cases of the positive sciences. For Ghaz ali 
the intellect does see, but its objects are not simply human constructs. Absolute judgments 
regarding the necessary, the possible and the impossible are always present, but with regard to 
other judgments the human intellect is only a capacity. Hence, it needs  to be enlightened by 
the hikma , of which the greatest is the word of God, especially the  Qur'an by which vision is 
accomplished.   
What then of "the first principles"? For Ghaz ali these are grasped directly in and for 
themselves; they have an unchangeable character which is imposed with necessity upon the mind. 
Their purpose is to prepare the mind by providing an anticipated experience of necessity, which 
truly is had only by God and the truth of the Prophet. Despite even this, however, they could yet 
be co nsidered a mirage or illusion, for their definitive truth is had only when they are envisaged in 
terms of, that is, in and by Islam.  
To understand this seeming affirmation and yet negation of the competency of reason it is 
necessary to recall that epistemo logy is essentially dependent upon metaphysics for an 
understanding of the nature and origin of its object, since knowledge too is a reality and subject to 
the laws of being. McCarthy points out that in his metaphysics Ghaz ali was always a convinced 
occasi onalist. God in creating nature and mankind remained the one truly Real Being and hence 
the source of all action. Men may act, but the reality or being of the effect was the result of the 
activity not of man, but of God. For knowledge this means that man m ay think, but that the reality 
of knowledge and truth is the effect not of man, but of God.   
An intermediate position was held by the Christian Platonists of the School of St. Augustine 
for whom a special light or illumination was needed in order to explai n the universality and 
necessity of the human knowledge which man drew from particular and changing reality. In 
response to this position, it was the contribution of Thomas Aquinas to see that the power of God 
implied that his creatures be self -sufficient.  This meant that in their own (created) right they 
possessed all the competencies needed in order to realize all the actions which were in accord with 
their nature.16 This extended the power of God proportionately and by participation to all His 
work.   

(This was an important corrective by Thomas to one of the main defects which Ghaz ali found 
in Averroes. Ghaz ali was concerned that too close a following of Aristotle led Averroes to 
attenuate the reality of the individual's spiritual soul and to an inadequate  affirmation of the 
resurrection on the Last Day. This Ghaz ali classified as heretical.)17   
For Ghaz ali the conviction that the realization of truth was the effect of God, not of man, 
meant that the first truths could be looked upon in two ways. If seen in  relation to the truth about 
God and constituting part of knowledge about God, they received therefrom truly definitive 
power.   
The first principles could, however, be looked upon in another way, namely, as principles for 
any reasoning to God, or indeed fo r any reasoning whatsoever. Such knowledge is not certain. 
This is expressed by the phrase "the equivalence of proofs" ( takafu' al -adilla ) indicating that 
"falsehood on the part of a proof does not entail the falsity of the object it proves." It can apply 
either to the necessary principles and to all properly speculative knowledge or only to the latter, 
all which it blankets with doubt.   
Up to 28 years of age, during the period when Ghaz ali was introduced to 
philosophy,  kalam, fiqh and all the sciences, his  mind was molded according to this pattern by his 
teacher, Juwayni, who was among the initiators of this view, which Ibn Khaldãn considers the 
distinguishing doctrine between "the ancients" and "the moderns". It is not surprising then that 
Ghaz ali would be  the one to write the  Tahafut al -Falasifa and thereby the major figure in the 
discontinuation of the Islamic strain of Greek philosophy. Averroes's belated effort to answer in 
his Tahafut al  tahafut was destined beforehand to be ineffective, for no reasone d reply could be 
effective when reason was no longer held to provide knowledge that was certain.  
  
The Metaphysics of Mysticism  
 
Ghaz ali's epistemology did not change in the second period of his life, beginning from the age 
of 34, when he was placed in cha rge of the Niz amiyya School in Baghdad. Writing as he does 
from this epistemological perspective, Farid Jabre tends to down play the philosophical 
significance of this second period.18 He sees it as but a repetition of the first period, though now 
in psych ological and phenomenal terms describing Ghaz ali's lived experience of the limitation of 
reason. To McCarthy, however, it is just the opposite; having reduced Ghaz ali's first crisis to being 
simply a universal experience of passing from adolescence, he pla ces all the meaning in the second 
phase of his life,19 which all agree to be the main focus of the  Munqidh .  
It is suggested here that the truth lies between these two positions.20 That is, the main lines 
of his epistemology can indeed be traced in the ear lier period, as Jabre has so effectively done. He 
is correct in observing that during that earlier period Ghaz ali did not advance beyond the realm of 
reason and that it lacked definitive certainty. But if that be so, when in the second period he does 
activ ely apply himself to the Way that leads beyond reason, identifies its veracity, and then applies 
himself in a ten year retreat to the assiduous practice of the Way from which results his  Ihya, the 
landmark of Islamic spirituality, certainly something of th e greatest moment has taken place. It is 
hardly a mere "répétition de la première . . . sous un autre form,"21 as claims Jabre. His failure to 
appreciate the distinctive reality of the achievement of the second phase of Ghaz ali's life would 
seem to result from seeing it only in psychological terms as the flow of phenomena of a human 
order, rather than appreciating it in metaphysical terms, e.g., of a Heidegger, as the unveiling of 
Being Itself through the intentional life of  dasein , or in the properly mysti cal terms which 
McCarthy approaches with great respect, even awe, as before a sanctuary of the divine. This 

enables McCarthy to grasp the tremendous fascination of the religious event lived by Ghaz ali and 
described in the main body of his text.22   
If the  Munqidh  has a consistent message, it is that at its highest reason remains insufficient 
and that even in its efforts to defend religion in the  Kalam it is weak and largely ineffectual.  
 One cannot come to the reality of the divine in the depth of the human heart by mere belief 
according to dogmatic formula, for they remain surface, brittle and subject to dissolution. The 
approach to the divine is rather by ascetic and ritual practices which progressively remove the 
chains that bind the heart so as to allow i t to open before the corresponding unveiling of the divine. 
It is in this that one comes to certain knowledge ( yaqin), rising above religious conformism ( taqlid) 
through actively savoring the experience of God. Here, reason as prepared by the practices of cult 
and informed by meditation upon the prophetic teaching, has only to reflect upon itself as a 
concrete reality.   
In contrast to the objective and relatively exterior stance of pure speculative reason which can 
lead only to  I'tiqad , Ghaz ali insists that  in the mystical Way of the Sufi's the divine is seized 
immediately and savored. He stresses thus the interiority and lived subjectivity of this process. 
This accords with his description of certainty as a state of soul so bound to, and satisfied by, its 
object that nothing could detach it therefore. Even more, it is real union with God and definitive 
fulfillment, of which the certainty is but a sign.  
 In this light it is possible to appreciate more deeply the meaning of the  Munqidh . It is not only 
a grippi ng account of a psychological drama with deep sonorities lived by Ghaz ali in Baghdad. 
His discovery upon their review that all other ways were wanting -- philosophy,  kalam and 
especially  talqid  -- and his being led thereby to the Sufi Way of self -abnegatio n and union with 
God was not only the progression of the life of one person. Beyond this it is a description of the 
Way of continued emergence of the divine in time through prophecy and of the opening of hearts 
thereto through the mystical path. It is trul y an account of God with us, which transforms human 
life and history.  
 One who appreciated the implications of this less thoroughly and less deeply than Ghaz ali 
would have worked out some pragmatic compromise allowing him to stay in Baghdad -- after all, 
as a spiritually sensitive director he would be better for the school than he had been when he acted 
too much on the basis of human reason and for the too human motives of fame and honor. It is 
testimony to his sincerity and charity that he could not act on  the basis of any such compromise. 
In turn, it suggests responses to problems raised from a number of directions.  
 Ghaz ali himself was conscious that some would suggest that he was being led by his ego to 
attempt to become the reformer of his century, acco rding to the prophecy that each century would 
begin with a major reformer.23 But if ever human reason could conceive such a hope it would 
certainly be based upon his position as director of the great Niz amiyya school in Baghdad, not as 
a hermit enclosed in  the minaret of the mosque at Damascus or in his hometown of Tãs.  
 Others would cite his phrase that all his prior life had been led by the search for fame, that 
his teaching "had not been directed towards God the Almighty alone . . . (but to) seek glory a nd 
renown."24 Based on this they would question the sincerity of his conversion and hence of this 
account.25  
 But the remark would be meaningless except in the context of conversion from such 
motivation. There are those who would question the sincerity of Descartes's references to God and 
in effect eviscerate Books III -V of his  Meditations  in order to protect the forced reductionism of 
their materialist reading of Books II and VI. Similarly, there are critics who, in order to protect 
their own overly litera l and out -of-context reading of a very few lines, would reject the seriousness 

of Ghaz ali's account of his conversion and by implication the authenticity of the whole teaching 
of his massive  Iya' 'Ulãm ad -Din. But they must be guided by something other tha n Ghaz ali's text 
or his life.   
Still others26 would see his departure from Baghdad not in the spiritual terms in which he 
depicts it, but rather as fear generated by the assassination of his sponsor,  Nizam al-Mulk. 
Certainly, the Niz amiyya school at Baghda d was the key intellectual battlefield and Ghaz ali was 
its key figure. He does not hide the element of fear, which was not unnatural in the circumstances. 
But Ghaz ali places it within the context of the much broader and deeper sweep of the challenge of 
conversion in his life. Undoubtedly, the assassination of the patron of his School was too great and 
threatening a happening to be ignored, but this account, written when he was an advanced Sufi, 
naturally describes all in terms of his awareness of the Provid ence of God, rather than as simply 
the machinations of mere humans. The description of his life is in terms of his search for the Way 
and of what can be communicated of this that has meaning for a broad class of readers interested 
in the Way to truth. In t hese terms the assassinations and other turmoils of his particular time are 
of marginal importance.   
It might be noted further that even late in his ten year period of retreat, when he was 
considering how to respond to the tepidity abroad in Islam, he cons idered it important to have an 
authoritative patron. This could be taken as an issue of protection, but it seems more probable that 
it was considered important as an element in the plan of Niz am to develop an alliance of faith and 
political power which cou ld protect against Batinism and promote the Sunnite Islamic faith. The 
assassination of Nisa meant, of course, the sudden collapse of this worldly hope. 
The Munqidh  then may not be adequate history, for which reason this had to be supplied at the 
beginning  of this introduction. But the work has survived because it focused not upon surface 
events that happen only once, but upon what is essential in the human pilgrimage and gives it 
ultimate meaning.  
 One would hope then that he would have written much more extensively about his lived 
experience of the Way during his retreat following his departure from Baghdad. But, of course, he 
has done this brilliantly and in the greatest detail in the 40 books of the  Iya; it is there that one 
must turn for the enduring h arvest of his life of faith.  
 
The Impact of the Munqidh : Past and Present  
 
For Islam the impact of the  Munqidh  was decisive, especially if one includes the pattern of 
work it reflects, including Ghaz ali's decisive critique of philosophy in the  Tahafut, his description 
of the discovery of the mystical way th rough a critique of the sciences, including  kalam, in 
the Munqidh  itself, and the massively imposing  Iya with its detailed exposition of the spiritual 
wisdom gained from his decade long Sufi retreat. It is not without reason that Ghaz ali has been 
described as the greatest Muslim after Muhammad himself.   
As the classical sciences of  kalam and fiqh had come to appear respectively as too apologetic 
and too external, there was urgent need to renew access to t he religious wellsprings of Islam. The 
obvious candidate for such an expedition was reason. This had been developed to a high state by 
the Greeks, whose major works had been translated into Arabic. It had been richly developed by 
such ingenious Islamic thi nkers as al -Farabi, Ibn Sina and Averroes. But was reason enough -- 
particularly as developed in terms of a culture of the ancient Greek gods, rather than the revelation 
of the One God? Three responses were possible.   

The first, by Ibn Sina and Averroes, w as that reason could be of great assistance in this effort 
to discover the religious meaning of life and to order all life in that light. Indeed, their great works 
illustrate this point so well that no external certification of their significance need be a dded to that 
which shines from within.   
There is, however, a fatal weakness in human reason. As human it is limited and can never be 
adequate to the divine which transcends it. Yet, as reason it looks for universal principles and laws 
which order all and r ender all intelligible to a limited mind. This tension shows up most in the 
Platonic and neo -Platonic line of Greek reasoning upon which, especially, the Islamic philosophers 
drew. The result was a tendency to tailor such realities as the "assemblage" or r esurrection" of the 
body on the last day and the personal spiritual principle to categories which were not really 
adequate to the task. Ghaz ali drew up a list of twenty such points, three of which he cites in 
the Munqidh . Ghaz ali's judgment in the  Tahafut that this avenue was simply too dangerous to the 
integrity of revelation and should effectively be abandoned was accepted, despite the somewhat 
later protestations of Averroes.   
The second was that of Ghaz ali himself. In three years of work on the philosop hers he quite 
mastered their work and indeed wrote one of the major summaries of their thought for his time, 
the Maqasid al -Falasifa. In the end he felt, nonetheless, that he needed to abandon that avenue as 
well as  Kalam, his teaching of  fiqh and, of cour se, the position of the  ta'limites , for by exclusion 
he could see clearly that he must devote himself to the mystical Way of the Sufis. This led precisely 
beyond objective reason to an interior path of abnegation until his heart could open to a divine 
embr ace so intimate and life giving that it could actively be savored.   
The impact upon Islam of this step, so effectively presented in the  Munquidh , was of the 
highest order. Matching the turn away from Greek philosophy, there came a new appreciation of 
the spiritual and mystical dimension of Islam. However, while Ghaz ali's work leaves no question 
about the need to go beyond the sciences in faith, it is not iconoclastic. That is, its objective is not 
to destroy these sciences or to impede people from their stu dy. He is at pains to plead against this 
and to stress the need to look for truth everywhere, to accept it wherever it is found, and to 
recognize that it can be found even in the presence of error. Hence, upon discovering for himself 
the Way of Sufi he rem ained ever the teacher of  fiqh, and indeed returned to that work formally at 
the end of his life.  
In assessing the impact of his life, then, scholars speak of it not as an attack on the sacred 
sciences, but as aiding to overcome their arid scholasticism, a s narrowing the gulf between them 
and the wellsprings of the spirit, and even as discovering ways to infuse this new life into the old 
sciences.  
 To this should be added then a corrective of the commonplace that scholarship ended with, 
and even by, Ghaz ali. Though this may be true largely of the field of Greek philosophy, scholarship 
in Islam took on a new mode. Spiritually it became more deep and rich and corresponded more to 
the intensive life of faith of the people. Or perhaps this should be put the othe r way round, namely, 
that Ghaz ali's strong religious mark on the subsequent cultural history of Islam reflects, second 
only to Muhammad himself, the pilgrimage made by Ghaz ali and described in his  Munqidh .  
If so, this certainly is due in part to the fact that Ghaz ali recognized, explored and effectively 
presented a dimension of Islam not previously given so great a place. Some, writing from the 
individualistic Anglo -Saxon perspective, refer to this as an individualization of the Islamic faith, 
but the clos ed, self -centered character of individualism hardly does justice to the Sufi Way through 
the self to the Infinite source and goal of all. By abnegation one truly dies to self in order to be 
opened to the transcendent. Hence it would seem more true to speak  not of an individualization, 

but of a personalization of the life of faith. This would no longer be the affair only of great leaders 
-- caliphs or sultans -- but of the millions of persons who practiced this religion. And if these cultic 
practices are car ried out in unison by large bodies of persons they are seen by Ghaz ali as making 
the heart flexible and nimble for the Way which each must follow toward union with God. In other 
words, all was given new life by Ghaz ali's work which described the Way to the  divine Source and 
Goal of life. In turn this marks the character of each of the faithful and hence of the community of 
believers, Islam, as a whole.  
 There is, however, a possible third response to the relation of reason to this path of faith. We 
have see n the first response, that of Ibn Sina and Averroes, which gave primacy to reason in an 
attempt to reconcile it with faith. We saw also the second response, that of Ghaz ali, which did not 
move against reason, but was concerned above all with how this neede d to be transcended in the 
Way to God.   
The third response comes not from Islam, but from Christianity. This honored the works of 
the Arabic philosophers, not least Ghaz ali's Maqasid al -falasifa, which may have been the most 
effective summary of Greek line  of philosophy for the times.  
In the Christian medieval context there were both those who greatly admired this philosophy 
and others who, with Ghaz ali, pointed to its defects with regard to the spiritual dimension of the 
person, resurrection, etc. It was t he proper contribution of Thomas Aquinas during the following 
century to work out a resolution of these problems. He did do so neither by simply repeating 
Aristotle nor by abandoning his metaphysics, but by appreciating the deepened sense of being 
unveiled  in a cultural context marked by faith. The creative work to heal the discrepancies between 
Greek philosophy and a faith -filled vision of life and meaning could be considered quite properly 
a continuation of the work of the Islamic philosophers.   
On the on e hand, its thrust was not to oppose Ghaz ali, as had Averroes in his  Tahafut 
al Tahafut, but to respond positively to his concerns for the literal integrity of the faith. With 
Ghaz ali, it acknowledged the inadequacy of Greek thought for the vision of man i n this world and 
the next which had emerged under the light of faith. But it then went about the creative and 
properly philosophical work of resolving these conflicts by developing philosophy itself. In this 
sense it moved philosophy forward into an era of  faith, Islamic and Christian.   
On the other hand, with the philosophers, Thomas acknowledged the need to reconcile reason 
and faith, rather than simply to surpass reason. For though faith was more than reason, it did not 
contradict reason, but was aided b y it. Thus, the work of Thomas included very detailed 
commentaries on the works of Aristotle. Aquinas's  Disputed Questions  and Summa 
Theologiae  constitute a detailed philosophy of the human person and an ethics.   
While Thomas thus provided the context in w hich a spiritual theology could be constructed, 
it is notable that R. Garrigou -Lagrange, an eminent Thomist, in actually carrying out such a 
construction drew notably on the mystic experience of Theresa of Avila and John of the Cross.27 
This may suggest th at this third alternative of Thomas Aquinas did not succeed in adequately 
integrating the first approach by objective reason with the second by mystical interiority, and that 
Ghaz ali's work has a further major role to play in any such integration.  
 Neverth eless, this third response by Thomas Aquinas, by resolving the problems pointed out 
by Ghaz ali in the first alternative by Ibn Sina and Averroes made it possible to continue to mine 
the vein of Islamic -Greek philosophy with its primacy on reason. This open ed the way for 
developments which before long would evolve into the development of the sciences and their 
accompanying technology that have characterized the modern age. Indeed, to the degree that the 
modern developments of scientific thought are especiall y Platonic in character they correspond 

more to the Platonic character of Islamic philosophy than to the ultimately Aristotelian character 
of Thomas's own thought.  
 Commonly it is noted, however, that in modern times attention to reason has degenerated int o 
rationalism, accompanied by a desiccating lack of adequate attention to the life of the spirit. Indeed, 
the triumphs of rationalism in the 20th century have been characterized by an oppressive 
totalitarianism and a deadening consumerism. These deficienci es of rationalism call for Ghaz ali's 
clear proclamation of the distinctive character of the spirit, and of the Way which leads thereto. 
Healing our times must begin with the Spirit and the Way, for only in their higher light can we 
face the unfinished task  of working out the relation of reason to the fullness of the human spirit.   
This suggests then that the goal of Ghaz ali for our times would be that reason be inspired by, 
and directed to, life in the Spirit. This, in turn, would enable the progress of reason truly to serve 
men and women, not only as images, but indeed as intimates of God. This is the central message 
of Gha zali's Munqidh , if not for his day, then certainly for ours.   
 
Notes   
 
1. Richard Joseph McCarthy,  Freedom and Fulfillment  (Boston: Twayne, 1980), pp. xii -xiii 
and xlvi -xlvii.  
2. (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1974), 3 vols, especially the Intr oduction and 
General Prologue in Vol. I, pp. 30 -99. 
3. McCarthy, pp. xiv -xx. 
4. Farid Jabre in al -Ghaz ali, Al-Munqidh min Ad alal (Erreur et Délivrance ) tran., intro., notes 
par Farid Jabre (Beyrouth: Commision Internationale pour la Tradãction des Chefs -d'Oeuvre, 
1959), pp. 21 -22. 
5. McCarthy, pp. xxxv -xlii. 
6. Ibid., pp. xxi -xxiv; Jabre, p. 53.  
7. Ibid., pp. xxiii.  
8. Munqidh , chapter 4.  
9. Jabre, pp. 27 -41. 
10. Gerald Stanly, Contemplation as Fulfillment of the Human Person", in George F McLean, 
ed., Personalist  Ethics and Human Subjectivity, Vol. II of  Ethics at the Crossroads (Washington, 
D.C.: The Council for Research in Values and Philosophy, 1995), appendix, pp. 365.  
11. Jabre, pp. 41 -51. 
12. V. Havel, "Address in  Philadelphia", July 4, 1994 in  The Washington  Post,  July 6, A 19.  
13. McCarthy, pp. 121 -122, nn. 43 -44. 
14. Farid Jabre, pp. 41 -47. 
15. R. Descartes,  Discourse on Method , III. 
16. G. F. McLean, "Philosophic Continuity and Thomism" in  Teaching Thomism 
Today  (Washington: Catholic University , 1963), pp. 23 -28. 
17. Munqidh,  chapter 2, part 2.  
18. Jabre, p. 48.  
19. McCarthy, p 121, n ote 43. 
20. Hodgson, vol. II, p. 186, n ote 18, points insightfully in this direction noting that the 
philosophy/theology of Paul Tillich may be the best modern corr espondent to the thought of 
Ghaz ali on how "reason leads to the need for ultimate faith, but awaits revelation to carry it further. 

. . . (This) is not a matter of supplementing reason on its own level, but of complementing it in 
total experience."  
21. Jabre, p. 48.  
22. McCarthy, pp. lvi -lx. 
23. McCarthy, pp. xxvi -xxix.  
24. Munqidh , chap. 2, part 3.  
25. 'Abd al -Da 'im al -Baqar i, I'tirafat al-Ghaz ali, aw kayfa 'avrakla al -Ghaz ali nafsahu  (The 
Confessions of al -Ghaz ali) (Cairo: 1943). See McCarthy, pp. xxv i-xxix.  
26. F. Jabre,  al-Munqidh , pp. 22 -23. See McCarthy's response, pp. xxxv -xlii. 
27. R. Garrigou Lagrange,  Christian Perfection and  Contemplation according to St. Thomas 
Aquinas and St. John of the Cross, trans. M.T. Doyle (London: Herder, 1937);  The T hree Ages of 
the Interior  Life, Prelude to Eternal Life, trans. M.T. Doyle (London: Herder: 1947).  
  
 
  