ment novel) as the Germans call this 
genre. These critics regard the book not as a true record of his real life and development, but as a 
fictional account written when he had finished developing. For example, Abd Al-Daim al-Baqari 
says that al-Munqidh is neither an Apologia pro vita sua nor an autobiography, but a novel with a 
message, a sort of roman à thèse, with al-Ghazali himself as the hero. He was trying to "leave to 
posterity a fictional image of his personality and give an interpretation of his life which would give 
him an unrivaled place in all the domains of thought and of the life of the Muslims of his time, 
including especially the knowledge and practice of Tasawwuf (Sophism). With a dosage of 
avowals insinuations which without being totally false would not correspond to historical reality." 
The crux of this argument is that al-Ghazali himself said that his actions were not directed towards 
Allah, but towards his own quest for fame and prestige.  

Al-Baqari makes these avowals the explicative principle of the whole life of al-Ghazali, his 
actions, movements, reposes and intentions, not only before his withdrawal, but even after." 
(Itirafat al-Ghazali, Cairo, 1943; McCarthy, p. xxvi). This, in our view, is an untenable criticism. 
It stretches the text too far from its context and the author's psychology and career.  
Al-Ghazali's confession should add to his reputation, rather than detract from it. Great people 
are never self-satisfied. Prophets look at their own work critically, unless it is revelation from God.  
Once a phrenologist looked at a bust of Socrates and said, "This man is controlled by lust and 
imperfection." People responded vehemently that "this was the most virtuous man on earth." But 
Socrates said, "No, it is true. What he said is true about my nature, but I have striven to overcome 
the imperfections."  
If al-Ghazali told us about something in his inner self we should not take it as a means to 
attack him or to doubt what he says. In this case, we should look at the man's actions and his efforts 
to improve himself, not at his confession and hold it against him.  
To doubt the reliability and historical value of al-Ghazali's books, moreover, entails saying 
that al-Ghazali was attempting in fictional form to prove the inferiority of the mind and the 
evidence of the sense compared with the illuminating light which Allah reveals to worthy men. 
This cannot be true when one sees al-Ghazali's sincerity and devotion. The book itself cannot 
support this interpretation. In no way does it give the impression of being affectation. This is one 
reason, perhaps a psychological reason.  
Secondly, all al-Ghazali's other books and recorded conversations support what he says in this 
book, e.g., his conversation with the contemporary historian Abd Al-Ghafir al-Farisi preserved by 
Ibn-Asakir in his book Tabyeen kadhib al-Muftari as referred to in my introduction to the Arabic 
text. 
Indeed, as a writer, the art of writing may cause one to shift emphases in the presentation. But 
the book holds a faithful mirror to the natural development of al-Ghazali's character and 
knowledge.  
Here we may refer to two poems written by al-Ghazali himself at the time of his spiritual and 
intellectual doubts.  

With light the face of Your Majesty was revealed.  
And I wondered  
And in You all-manifest, lay my confusion.  
O You are the nearest of things.  
You have revealed Yourself, filling my view.  
With Your manifestation of light, but becoming hidden  
in a way which nearly left me without faith.  
When You hid Yourself You threw between mind  
and senses a difference that brooks no compromise.  
If mind claims to know Your Presence and denies the  
sense, who called it impossible.  
The senses say to the mind stop here.  
This is because the senses deny You O God as a  
picture to be seen and the mind sees You through abstract evidence.