In a new version of the al-Munqidh, he concentrated his attention on a long introduction explaining the theory of Sophism, rather than focusing on the textual evaluation of the prototype version. His introduction covers almost 320 pages in comparison to al-Ghazali’s original book which has only 80 pages, excluding the space given to the footnotes. 

Al-Ghazali’s name did not appear on the cover and title pages. Its first mention is on p. 138, in the context of his “Fatwa” quoted in full by the editor. The second is on p. 214 in the context of his challenge to the principles of knowledge. 

After the Sheikh’s exhaustive explication of Sophism from its original sources to its modern time, he devoted the fifth section of his introduction to al-Ghazali and his milieu, pages 269-323. The information given about al-Ghazali is based almost entirely on quotations and soon digresses from al-Munqidh to Ihyya Ulum al-Din by the same author as an independent subtitle occupying 33 pages. Nothing is said about the al-Munqidh. 

It must be noted that there are editorial mistakes in Sheikh Abdul Halim’s version, which still appear in its third edition (Cairo, Dar al-Maarif, 1988). Some editions of al-Munqidh have not escaped editorial mistakes/errata, yet are tolerably acceptable. To save time and energy, however, it is expedient to turn to the main point of the present work.

Content and Value of Al-Munqidh Min Al-Dalal 

Al-Munqidh min al-Dalal is not only the greatest, but the crown of all al-Ghazali’s work. It is small in size, but as a document is great in scholarly and historical value. It sheds light on al-Ghazali's personality and provides unique details about his life, milieu and other related issues. 

Al-Munqidh does not limit itself to one approach to its subject. It starts from one point and aims toward one goal, but explores many roads to this end. This book may be loosely categorized as autobiographical, although it was not intended to be an autobiography in the strict sense. Islamic literature did not include such a category in the way that it developed in the West. This may be.

Autobiographical, although it was not intended to be an autobiography in the strict sense. Islamic 
literature did not include such a category in the way that it developed in the West. This may be