Nevertheless, this third response by Thomas Aquinas, by resolving the problems pointed out by Ghazali in the first alternative by Ibn Sina and Averroes made it possible to continue to mine the vein of Islamic-Greek philosophy with its primacy on reason. This opened the way for developments which before long would evolve into the development of the sciences and their accompanying technology that have characterized the modern age. Indeed, to the degree that the modern developments of scientific thought are especially Platonic in character they correspond more to the Platonic character of Islamic philosophy than to the ultimately Aristotelian character of Thomas's own thought. 

Commonly it is noted, however, that in modern times attention to reason has degenerated into rationalism, accompanied by a desiccating lack of adequate attention to the life of the spirit. Indeed, the triumphs of rationalism in the 20th century have been characterized by an oppressive totalitarianism and a deadening consumerism. These deficiencies of rationalism call for Ghazali's clear proclamation of the distinctive character of the spirit, and of the Way which leads thereto. Healing our times must begin with the Spirit and the Way, for only in their higher light can we face the unfinished task of working out the relation of reason to the fullness of the human spirit. 

This suggests then that the goal of Ghazali for our times would be that reason be inspired by, and directed to, life in the Spirit. This, in turn, would enable the progress of reason truly to serve men and women, not only as images, but indeed as intimates of God. This is the central message of Ghazali's Munqidh, if not for his day, then certainly for ours. 

Notes 

1. Richard Joseph McCarthy, Freedom and Fulfillment (Boston: Twayne, 1980), pp. xii-xiii and xlvi-xlvii. 
2. (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1974), 3 vols, especially the Introduction and General Prologue in Vol. I, pp. 30-99. 
3. McCarthy, pp. xiv-xx. 
4. Farid Jabre in al-Ghazali, Al-Munqidh min Adalal (Erreur et Délivrance) tran., intro., notes par Farid Jabre (Beyrouth: Commission Internationale pour la Traduction des Chefs-d'Oeuvre, 1959), pp. 21-22. 
5. McCarthy, pp. xxxv-xlii. 
6. Ibid., pp. xxi-xxiv; Jabre, p. 53. 
7. Ibid., pp. xxiii. 
8. Munqidh, chapter 4. 
9. Jabre, pp. 27-41. 
10. Gerald Stanley, "Contemplation as Fulfillment of the Human Person", in George F. McLean, ed., Personalist Ethics and Human Subjectivity, Vol. II of Ethics at the Crossroads (Washington, D.C.: The Council for Research in Values and Philosophy, 1995), appendix, pp. 365. 
11. Jabre, pp. 41-51. 
12. V. Havel, "Address in Philadelphia", July 4, 1994 in The Washington Post, July 6, A 19. 
13. McCarthy, pp. 121-122, nn. 43-44. 
14. Farid Jabre, pp. 41-47. 
15. R. Descartes, Discourse on Method, III. 
16. G. F. McLean, "Philosophic Continuity and Thomism" in Teaching Thomism Today (Washington: Catholic University, 1963), pp. 23-28. 
17. Munqidh, chapter 2, part 2. 
18. Jabre, p. 48. 
19. McCarthy, p. 121, note 43. 
20. Hodgson, vol. II, p. 186, note 18, points insightfully in this direction noting that the philosophy/theology of Paul Tillich may be the best modern correspondent to the thought of Ghazali on how "reason leads to the need for ultimate faith, but awaits revelation to carry it further.

The philosophy/theology of Paul Tillich may be the best modern correspondent to the thought of 
Ghazali on how "reason leads to the need for ultimate faith, but awaits revelation to carry it further.