Makes it one of the most outstanding works in world 
literature. Al Ghazali states in the introduction that he wrote the work at the request of a brother in 
the faith who asked him "to reveal... the purpose of the sciences, the evil and the depths of the 
schools of thought." This could be a real account and/or a literary device; in any case, most agree 
that it was meant for a type of reader, not for only one individual. The work is intended to explain 
how he first established the bases and limits of reason, and later broke beyond reason to find the 
Way to definitive certitude and spiritual fulfillment. By a process of exclusion his review of the 
competencies and limits of kalam, of philosophy and of the doctrine of the ta'limites led him to 
Sufism. There he found the Way which could take him to the prophetic light beyond what "there 
was no other light on the face of the earth."8   
Proximately, he was worried by the Batinites who wished to propose, as an infallible Imam, 
the Fatimid Caliph of Cairo. Ghazali considered this prerogative to have belonged only to 
Muhammad himself. Like the Ash'ari facing the Mu'tazilites two centuries earlier, he was forced 

to rethink for himself and his contemporaries sunnite dogma, and thereby to renew the religious 
spirit. It was, moreover, a task which it had been prophesied would be needed at the beginning of 
each century.  
To appreciate this project it may be helpful to look first at its structure, especially as analyzed 
by Farid Jabre,9 and then to consider its meaning and accomplishment.   

General Introduction  (pp. 63)   

Ghazali notes that from his early youth, before the age of 20, he had been concerned with the 
problem of certitude and had examined critically all the roads leading not only to religious 
conviction, but even to nihilism. Rather than accept the easy but blind conformism of taqlid, 
however, he attempted to seize the deep basic reality of things, especially of human nature itself 
as it opened to the divine. In this regard what he sought was certain knowledge, which he described 
as a state of soul so bound to, and satisfied by, its object that nothing could detach it therefrom.   

The First Crisis: Sophistry and Denial of All Knowledge  (pp. 66)   

In search of this perfect certitude he turned first to sense knowledge but soon recognized the 
illusions it generated. When he turned to reason and its first principles, however, he had difficulty 
distinguishing their certitude from that which he had experienced in dreams; indeed for the Sufis 
the whole of this life was a dream. After two months of despair with regard to knowledge he 
regained confidence in the directives of reason. This confidence, however, came not as a clear 
deduction from any methodical reasoning, but by light which God projected into his heart.   

Evaluation of Other Ways  (p. 70)   

Long after -- his education having been completed, and now at the head of the school 
at Baghdad  -- he returned once again to this issue of certitude. Now, however, it was not merely 
the general question of how certitude could be had in any reasoning, rather it was how one could 
be bound irrevocably in blessed union with God. As truth is sought by four different groups each 
proposing its own path, some time after 484/1091 and over a period of years at Baghdad Ghazali 
set about studying each in depth to see which provided the true Way to God.   
1. Kalam: (pp. 71) Through the Prophet God revealed the body of true beliefs upon which 
depends man's happiness in this life and the next. Because some deny this and attempt to disturb 
the faith of the believers, an apologetic approach (the kalam) was developed. This seeks to argue 
from premises which these unbelievers do admit in order to show the contradictions into which 
they are led by their unbelief.