Came a new appreciation of 
the spiritual and mystical dimension of Islam. However, while Ghazali's work leaves no question 
about the need to go beyond the sciences in faith, it is not iconoclastic. That is, its objective is not 
to destroy these sciences or to impede people from their study. He is at pains to plead against this 
and to stress the need to look for truth everywhere, to accept it wherever it is found, and to 
recognize that it can be found even in the presence of error. Hence, upon discovering for himself 
the Way of Sufi, he remained ever the teacher of fiqh, and indeed returned to that work formally at 
the end of his life.  
In assessing the impact of his life, then, scholars speak of it not as an attack on the sacred 
sciences, but as aiding to overcome their arid scholasticism, as narrowing the gulf between them 
and the wellsprings of the spirit, and even as discovering ways to infuse this new life into the old 
sciences.  
To this should be added then a corrective of the commonplace that scholarship ended with, 
and even by, Ghazali. Though this may be true largely of the field of Greek philosophy, scholarship 
in Islam took on a new mode. Spiritually it became more deep and rich and corresponded more to 
the intensive life of faith of the people. Or perhaps this should be put the other way round, namely, 
that Ghazali's strong religious mark on the subsequent cultural history of Islam reflects, second 
only to Muhammad himself, the pilgrimage made by Ghazali and described in his Munqidh.  
If so, this certainly is due in part to the fact that Ghazali recognized, explored and effectively 
presented a dimension of Islam not previously given so great a place. Some, writing from the 
individualistic Anglo-Saxon perspective, refer to this as an individualization of the Islamic faith, 
but the closed, self-centered character of individualism hardly does justice to the Sufi Way through 
the self to the Infinite source and goal of all. By abnegation one truly dies to self in order to be 
opened to the transcendent. Hence it would seem more true to speak not of an individualization,

The self to the Infinite source and goal of all. By abnegation one truly dies to self in order to be 
opened to the transcendent. Hence it would seem more true to speak not of an individualization,