recites that they review his teaching on prophecy as 
transcending the capacities of reason.  
- The arguments of the libertines, Ghazali directs that they read his work, The Alchemy of 
Happiness. 
- The claim that prophecy is only for the common people, but not for those who can understand 
its contents and develop an empirical ethics (hakim) based on God, Ghazali teaches that in fact 
they reject prophecy because they reduce what is distinctive about it, namely, its transcendence of 
reason, to the level of a sage usage of reason.   

But Ghazali is conscious that holiness as an inner reality can be betrayed above all from 
within, that those who should exemplify the experiences achieved from the Way in fact may be 
impeded by various temptations and therefore generate scandal rather than constituting beacons 
for others. Ghazali attempts to protect against this by assuring: (1) that all have knowledge of the 
difference between good and evil and should not be misled by anyone who falls before temptations 
which everyone experiences, and (2) that knowledge of the Way is itself a corrective for it directs 
one to repent and move on, not to remain in sin.  
But Ghazali had a practical response to make as well. Seeing that tepidity seemed to be 
spreading he became convinced that a strenuous effort at education was needed. He made a last 
effort in that direction by accepting the invitation of the son of Nizam to take charge of the school 
at Nishapur. When this was cut short by the assassination of his patron, he moved his effort to his 
home in Tas, where he built a school and monastery to teach and promote the practice of Sufism.   

Meaning of the Munqidh   

The above analysis of the structure of the text has attempted closely to follow its structure. 
The text, however, is not simply autobiographical, but a somewhat stylized ordering of the 
elements of his life and hence of his Sufi experience. In this his goal, he says, is to respond to the 
question of the purpose of the related sacred sciences and the evil and depth of the relevant schools 
of thought. Hence, in order further to unfold the import of the Munqidh it may help to add here 
some reflections upon the different philosophical issues involved.   

Epistemology   

The issue of knowledge and its competencies is basic here, for his purpose is to show not 
only what reason can do in order progressively to lead toward the Way, but even more what reason 
cannot do in order, through contrast, to make manifest what is distinctive and indispensable in the 
mystical Way of the Sufis. Moreover, beyond the issue of the way to personal perfection, Ghazali's 
understanding of knowledge was the key to his work on The Incoherence of the Philosophers 
(Tahafut al-Falasifa) which played a central role in the Islamic rejection of its heritage of work on 
the Greek philosophers' classic elaboration of reason. This may be related, on the one hand, to the 
troubled history of the relation of religion to the processes of modernization derived from the 
scientific elaboration of reason. On the other hand, it may relate also to the mystical direction of 
Islamic thought and its potential for contributing to the present renewal of the search for spiritual 
meaning in response to the loss of meaning in our increasingly rationalized society.   
To see how this can be so one should note with Farid Jabre that while the work was written 
toward the end of Ghazali's life its literary point of view is rather that of the period of his leadership 
of the school at Baghdad. Particularly, it reflects the point at which he comes seriously to 
investigate the adequacy of the sciences and schools of thought.