because Islam forbids anyone to boast of his own achievements or to talk about himself. Some 
early biographical information is implied in the philosophical and literary writings of Muslim 
scholars as indicated elsewhere in this introduction, but there is no class of autobiography as such. 
This may be the reason why Al-Ghazali did not give more information about himself in the book 
under focus. If he had not been bound by the conventions of his time, what fascinating details he 
could have given us.  
The facts that he does give about his own life are impressive and phrased in a masterly fashion 
and highly developed spiritualism. They are scattered in many of his works. If assembled in one 
place they would be enjoyable and rewarding. For example, in Al-Munqidh he spoke of sophism 
as his last permanent home, and gave the reasons for preferring it above other systems. In other 
writings he describes how he virtually became a Sufi himself and took the Sufi way and developed 
his experience of sophism.  
Al-Munqidh has three major dimensions; first, the autobiographical dimension which is 
indispensable in understanding Al-Ghazali’s works and milieu; secondly, the psychological and 
intellectual graph which records Al-Ghazali’s inner experience, intellectual endurance and response 
to the power of the moment; and thirdly, investigating the religious and intellectual trends of the 
time and milieu, analyzing and rectifying them from his position as a philosopher and religious 
reformer.  
Al-Ghazali wrote Al-Munqidh min al-Dalal at the age of fifty. The precise date of this book is 
not written, but it is not impossible to identify. He wrote it between 499 A.H./1105 A.D. and 500 
A.H./1106 A.D., about five or six years before his death. This in itself indicates that Al-Ghazali 
was very active up to the very end of his life. 
So far as is known to scholarship, it is the last of his long life’s work. It is therefore not 
surprising that it encapsulates all aspects of his spiritual and intellectual experience and output. 
Therefore, it is full of recapitulatory references epitomizing his major works. In essence, it is the 
flower and fruit of his journey in his short life span.  
In 1842, Al-Munqidh was discovered and translated into French for the first time by Auguste 
Schmolders. The book itself bears two titles. The first is Al-Munqidh min al-Dalal wa al-Mufsih 
an al-Ahwal. (The Deliverance from Error and the Revealer of the Mystical States of the Soul). 
The second is Al-Munqidh min al-Dalal wal Muwassil ila Dhil Izza wal Jalal (The Deliverance 
from Error and the Deliverer to the Possessor of Power and Glory).  
There is good reason to believe that these titles were concurrent. In his book, Hayy Ibn 
Yaqzan (Cairo, Subayh, 1978, p. 9), Ibn Tufayl (d. 581 A.H./1185 A.D.) refers to Al-
Munqidh under the first of the two long titles with an insignificant variant of the preposition -- 
using bi in place of ann. The two different forms of the title both start with “Deliverance from 
Error”, showing that Al-Ghazali himself had experienced the confusion of being wrong, or rather 
had been part of a society in error. He was exploring the way to set his foot on the right path, 
looking for the kind of character which would choose the right path. We may ask why Al-Ghazali 
chose to call his book "Deliverance from Error". The Prophet Muhammad (Peace be upon him) 
says, "I have left two things for you. If you take hold of them you will never go astray. They are 
the book of Allah and my sunnah (i.e. my example)."  
First, there are some points to raise about the title which appears in two forms.