that he treats the nature and ability of reason to achieve the real nature, or by spatial analogy, the 
deep reality (haqiqa or pulp) of things as opposed to merely their surface appearance.  
To this spatial analogy of levels on the part of the object, there corresponds in Ghazali's 
thought a parallel set of levels on the part of the self. The deepest level is the transrational goal of 
the Sufis, but this can be illumined through contrast to the more surface or preliminary levels, 
which are those of sense and reason that Ghazali lists in his section on prophecy. Let us attempt a 
more precise delineation of his notion of reason; by contrast this could provide insight not only 
into his perception of the nature of the goal of the mystical Way, but also into the limitation of the 
sciences. Through the Tahafut this forces the break of the subsequent Islamic tradition from its 
earlier work in the Greek tradition.   
In Aristotle's logic, which ruled his development of the structure of the sciences, all begins 
from first principles such as that of non-contradiction first sketched out by Parmenides. These have 
absolute and universal value from the beginning of the work of reason. In this light, by a process  
of induction from the particular to the universal, the natures of things are abstracted and with these 
the deductive syllogism is constructed in the various sciences, each with their distinctive universal 
principles.  
Jabre suggests that Ghazali took only the form of such syllogistic reasoning (via the 
Arab qiyas), and into this poured a quite different content. This was not simply the results of 
induction from concrete sense experience, even in the cases of the positive sciences. For Ghazali 
the intellect does see, but its objects are not simply human constructs. Absolute judgments 
regarding the necessary, the possible and the impossible are always present, but with regard to 
other judgments the human intellect is only a capacity. Hence, it needs to be enlightened by 
the hikma, of which the greatest is the word of God, especially the Qur'an by which vision is 
accomplished.   
What then of "the first principles"? For Ghazali these are grasped directly in and for 
themselves; they have an unchangeable character which is imposed with necessity upon the mind. 
Their purpose is to prepare the mind by providing an anticipated experience of necessity, which 
truly is had only by God and the truth of the Prophet. Despite even this, however, they could yet 
be considered a mirage or illusion, for their definitive truth is had only when they are envisaged in 
terms of, that is, in and by Islam.  
To understand this seeming affirmation and yet negation of the competency of reason it is 
necessary to recall that epistemology is essentially dependent upon metaphysics for an 
understanding of the nature and origin of its object, since knowledge too is a reality and subject to 
the laws of being. McCarthy points out that in his metaphysics Ghazali was always a convinced 
occasionalist. God in creating nature and mankind remained the one truly Real Being and hence 
the source of all action. Men may act, but the reality or being of the effect was the result of the 
activity not of man, but of God. For knowledge this means that man may think, but that the reality 
of knowledge and truth is the effect not of man, but of God.   
An intermediate position was held by the Christian Platonists of the School of St. Augustine 
for whom a special light or illumination was needed in order to explain the universality and 
necessity of the human knowledge which man drew from particular and changing reality.