Has not deterred us from our decision to make yet another translation. Beyond doubt, 
McCarthy has done justice to the text, illuminating its meaning and making it available to speakers 
of English. His footnotes, in general, serve the text well and enable us to understand al-Ghazali's 
statements.  
Nevertheless, on some occasions the footnotes are too bulky, incorporating irrelevant material, 
and addressing the general reader rather than the specialist. He refers to secondary sources and 
does not refer the Hadiths back to their respective authorities; in several cases he failed to identify 
al-Ghazali's sources. McCarthy's translation of the Hadith about the division of the Muslim nation 
into sects is incomplete and incorrect. Occasionally he confuses his reader when he refers to the 
authority of a certain Hadith. 
We therefore intend to introduce our own translation, feeling that it is needed and will prove 
useful. I will not try to justify this decision, beyond saying that Allah directed me to produce this 
translation which is directed wholly and sincerely to Him.  
Our translation takes into consideration the other translations in English, particularly M. Watt 
and McCarthy, and also the fragments of al-Munqidh that are in circulation in the writings of the 
orientalists.  
We have noted some differences in understanding the text and we have differed also from 
Farid Jabri’s French translation (Beirut, 1969), which appears in the bibliography. We have sought 
to give the most lucid rendering -- one that we consider much closer to al-Ghazali’s text and trend 
of thought.  
We have read and checked the available outstanding Arabic editions of this remarkable text. 
Two rare manuscripts: first, Shahid Ali Pasha, no. 1712, Istanbul, which is complete and well-
written, and which dates from 509 A.H. -510 A.H. (1115 A.D. -1116 A.D.), five years after the 

death of the author. This manuscript was dedicated directly to al-Ghazali. The second one is 
Talat, Cairo, Dar al-kutub, no. 637, which is important yet incomplete.  
Two outstanding Arabic editions deserve special comment: The Arabic text first published in 
Damascus (1956) by Jamil Salibah and Shukry Ayyad is good in the main; it is not the first edition 
of al-Munqidh from the chronological point of view, but to a great extent it is the most readable 
and tolerable version. The authors based their edition on the available extant Arabic versions. As 
they remarked, it was only by chance that they struck upon a single manuscript which lends 
authenticity to the Arabic version on which we are working. It should be noted, however, that the 
manuscript they had in hand was recently copied from an unknown and unverified version.  
But luckily enough the difference between the printed, published version, on the one hand, 
and the extant available manuscript, on the other hand, is not serious in many cases. Hence, our 
work and painstaking effort is to bring out a better, more critical and perfectly readable text. This 
can be seen from our Arabic version, appended here, if read against other versions in circulation.  
The second version to attract our critical attention is the version of al-Munqidh by his 
Eminence Sheikh Abdul Halim Mahmoud (Cairo, Dar-al Maarif, 1988). Sheikh Abdul Halim is a 
leading exponent of Sufism in modern times, and was known among his followers as the Ghazali 
of Egypt. He was an eminent scholar, well respected in Egypt and worldwide. I am proud to have 
had him as my mentor and to have received his special attention while still an undergraduate at Al-
Azhar University.  
Notwithstanding his erudition and practical Sufism, when he took upon himself to publish a 
new version of the al-Munqidh he concentrated his attention on a long introduction explaining the 
theory of Sufism, rather than focusing on the textual evaluation of the prototype version.