but of a personalization of the life of faith. This would no longer be the affair only of great leaders 
-- caliphs or sultans -- but of the millions of persons who practiced this religion. And if these cultic 
practices are carried out in unison by large bodies of persons, they are seen by Ghazali as making 
the heart flexible and nimble for the Way which each must follow toward union with God. In other 
words, all was given new life by Ghazali's work which described the Way to the divine Source and 
Goal of life. In turn this marks the character of each of the faithful and hence of the community of 
believers, Islam, as a whole.  
There is, however, a possible third response to the relation of reason to this path of faith. We 
have seen the first response, that of Ibn Sina and Averroes, which gave primacy to reason in an 
attempt to reconcile it with faith. We saw also the second response, that of Ghazali, which did not 
move against reason, but was concerned above all with how this needed to be transcended in the 
Way to God.   
The third response comes not from Islam, but from Christianity. This honored the works of 
the Arabic philosophers, not least Ghazali's Maqasid al-falasifa, which may have been the most 
effective summary of Greek line of philosophy for the times.  
In the Christian medieval context there were both those who greatly admired this philosophy 
and others who, with Ghazali, pointed to its defects with regard to the spiritual dimension of the 
person, resurrection, etc. It was the proper contribution of Thomas Aquinas during the following 
century to work out a resolution of these problems. He did so neither by simply repeating 
Aristotle nor by abandoning his metaphysics, but by appreciating the deepened sense of being 
unveiled in a cultural context marked by faith. The creative work to heal the discrepancies between 
Greek philosophy and a faith-filled vision of life and meaning could be considered quite properly 
a continuation of the work of the Islamic philosophers.   
On the one hand, its thrust was not to oppose Ghazali, as had Averroes in his Tahafut 
al-Tahafut, but to respond positively to his concerns for the literal integrity of the faith. With 
Ghazali, it acknowledged the inadequacy of Greek thought for the vision of man in this world and 
the next which had emerged under the light of faith. But it then went about the creative and 
properly philosophical work of resolving these conflicts by developing philosophy itself. In this 
sense it moved philosophy forward into an era of faith, Islamic and Christian.   
On the other hand, with the philosophers, Thomas acknowledged the need to reconcile reason 
and faith, rather than simply to surpass reason. For though faith was more than reason, it did not 
contradict reason, but was aided by it. Thus, the work of Thomas included very detailed 
commentaries on the works of Aristotle. Aquinas's Disputed Questions and Summa 
Theologiae constitute a detailed philosophy of the human person and an ethics.   
While Thomas thus provided the context in which a spiritual theology could be constructed, 
it is notable that R. Garrigou-Lagrange, an eminent Thomist, in actually carrying out such a 
construction drew notably on the mystic experience of Theresa of Avila and John of the Cross. 
This may suggest that this third alternative of Thomas Aquinas did not succeed in adequately 
integrating the first approach by objective reason with the second by mystical interiority, and that 
Ghazali's work has a further major role to play in any such integration.

Succeed in adequately integrating the first approach by objective reason with the second by mystical interiority, and that Ghazali's work has a further major role to play in any such integration.