Separates violently soul from body to focus entirely upon disincarnate 
mind. But it is no derogation of the soul and its spiritual journey to place it firmly in matter or 
body, in time or history. That one learns true values by reflecting on the death of others or upon 
the circumstances which threaten one's life is as common an occurrence as taking part in a burial 
or even visiting a hospital. It is then not surprising that his earlier attempt to practice Sufism was 
taken up once again with a renewed vigor by Ghazali. His sincerity in this is testified by the decade-
long ascetic retreat which he would soon take up and which he would never really abandon.  
In the Munqidh, he writes at length on a long debate within himself about making a definitive 
break with his present life of honor and adulation by students and leaders. Did this begin from the 

death of Nizam or, as would seem more probable, had it begun before, been catalyzed by the death 
of Nizam, and come to a conclusive decision in 486 AH. If so, was the subsequent time 
in Baghdad concerned only with tactics for carrying out his decision to leave his post there?  
At any rate, in 488/1095 he left Baghdad as part of a plan to definitively abandon his post 
there and the country as a whole, but letting on only that he intended to make the pilgrimage to 
Mecca. He wandered as a hermit in Damascus, Jerusalem, Hebron (and possibly Alexandria) for 
nearly two years. During that time he made the 489/1095-1096, pilgrimage to Mecca. Ibn al-'Arabi 
reports seeing him in Baghdad in Jumada 489/1095-1096, engaged in teaching, investigating the 
doctrines of the philosophers and writing. If he is correct about that date, later that year Ghazali 
made a definitive break from Baghdad. By 491, or 492/1094 at the latest, he returned to his home 
in Tas where he lived a life of prayer, worship, meditation and study.  
This retreat lasted some ten years when the son of Nizam al-mulk, Fakhr al-Mulk, who was 
trying to lay down a firm line of defense against Batinism Ta'limite summoned him to return once 
again to his earliest teaching post at Nishapur. 
At this point, Ghazali reports, he was coming to the conclusion that, due to the pervasive 
corruption in society, interior prayer was not enough; to it the work of teaching must be added. 
The invitation added an external impetus to his interior inclinations, and he took up his teaching 
once again in 499/1106. This was to be of short duration, for the following year Fakhr al-Mulk too 
was assassinated. Soon Ghazali returned to his home in Tas. There at the side of his home he built 
a school for teaching fiqh, which always had been his main area of teaching, as well as a Sufi 
monastery for those in search of prayer, spiritual learning and ascetic practice. Ghazali himself 
undertook for the first time intensive study of hadith or the traditions regarding the prophet. He 
continued writing till his very last days and passed away on Monday 14 Jumada II, 505.  

Works   

The writings of Ghazali, like that of many great thinkers of his day, are very vast, both in 
breadth and in overall length. A few notes on the categories of his works might convey some sense 
of their scope.  
1. The Islamic Sciences of fiqh and Kalam: fiqh was the center of his teaching and some of 
his writing in this field remain classics to the present day. On Kalam his only work is al-Iqtiad fi 
l-I'tiqad (The Golden Mean of Belief), which is a fine summary of its main theological questions. 
He seemed to place little trust in Kalam or apologetic theology. Indeed, his very last work 
was Iljam al-'Awamm 'an al-khawf fi 'Ilm al-Kalam (Restricting the Masses from Engaging in the 
Science of Kalam).  
2. Against Batinism: combating Batinism, especially the Ta'limites, was a major political and 
cultural campaign of the time.