In evidence of the creator's master hand, he found himself unable to go along with the natural scientists. In particular, he emphatically rejected their denial of resurrection and sensual pleasure. But it should be noted that he does not reject philosophy and science altogether; he still believed that there was much truth in Aristotle, whom like Plato and Socrates, was regarded as a "theist". The Imam sums up his view of the philosophers and scientists by pointing out that they served neither to prove nor disprove the existence of God. Al-Ghazali urged that the majority of people should be protected from potentially harmful ideas: he refers to the Epistles of the Ikhwan al-Safa and then says in warning, "Just as the poor swimmer must be kept from the slippery banks, so must mankind be kept from reading these books" and by analogy all similar books that can mislead and harm the average Muslims. After examining philosophy, Al-Ghazali stepped out of it and continued his search for truth.

True knowledge is derived from divine inspiration (from faith, rather than from the dictates of dry logic). Out of this combination of guiding reason and inspiring and unflickering Faith in the Divine, Al-Ghazali emerged. From this station, he became the triumphant exponent of the religion of Islam, and thus was fittingly called Hujjat ul Islam, the proof of Islam.

Translations and Editions of Al-Munqidh

The text of Al-Munqidh was rediscovered in 1842 A.D. by the scholar, Auguste Schmolders, who found the text, translated it into French and published it for the first time in Paris. Sixty-seven years later in 1909, the text appeared in English, translated by Claude Field under the title, The Confessions of Al-Ghazali. This translation reads well for the most part, but could be more faithful and precise. Professor Watt's translation tried to improve on Field's version. It was published under the title, The Faith and Practice of Al-Ghazali (London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1953). We have already said something about this version. The third and most recent translation into English is by Richard Joseph McCarthy S.J. and bears the title, Freedom and Fulfillment (Boston, 1980). The volume also includes related texts by Al-Ghazali translated by McCarthy. His translation reads well and is painstakingly clear and accurate. He benefited from previous translations and scholarly works on Al-Ghazali, drawing heavily on the studies by Boggs and Jabre. In his lengthy introduction of sixty pages (the text of the translation is fifty-three pages) and plentiful footnotes, McCarthy emphasizes the uniqueness of Al-Ghazali and the importance of studying his thought.

McCarthy based his translation not only on the well-known edition, but also on a new manuscript given to him by Father Boggs dated 509 A.H (1036 A.D), i.e. five years after Al-Ghazali's death and about ten years after Al-Munqidh was composed. This is the covert form, for McCarthy is fully aware that there is no serious difference between this early manuscript and the one used by Salibah and Ayyad, Jabre and Watt. In editing our Arabic text we have checked other manuscripts and several other editions of Al-Munqidh.

McCarthy read the previous translations and decided that there was still a need for his new one. He tells us that his translation was written while he was reading Al-Munqidh to his students at Oxford. He came up with some ideas that he thought worth publishing. McCarthy believes that his translation reads better and gives a more fair reflection of Al-Ghazali's life than do previous versions.

Reading that translation and the footnotes, we may say that the translation is good, but still not perfect; it has not deterred us from our decision to make yet another translation. Beyond doubt, McCarthy has done justice to the text, illuminating its meaning and making it available to speakers of English.