An apologetic approach (the kalam) was developed. This seeks to argue 
from premises which these unbelievers do admit in order to show the contradictions into which 
they are led by their unbelief. Kalam is of little service, however, for it can serve only those with 
a strong sense of the first and necessary principles of reason, but generally these persons limit their 
convictions solely to such principles. In time, kalam broadened its concerns to search into the deep 
reality of things through the use of such philosophical categories as substance and accidents, but 
it could attain little sure knowledge.   
2. Falasifa: (pp.73) Thinking that this had never seriously been studied, in Baghdad Ghazali 
spent two years reading the works of the Falasifa and a third in organizing his thoughts. He divided 
the Falasifa into three categories and quickly rejected the first two: the nihilists (dahriyyan) 
or Zanadiqa who deny the existence of God, and the naturalists (tabi-'iyyun) who believe in a 
powerful and wise being, but reject life after death.   

In contrast, he gave extensive attention to the third category, the theists (ilahiyyan), which 
include especially not only the Greek philosophers, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, but the Islamic 
philosophers, Avicenna and al-Farabi. Ghazali does not propose rejecting all their positions: 
mathematics, logic, physics, politics and ethics could be accepted with care and prudence. The 
difficulties of the philosophers come especially in the field of theodicy where they did not have 
success in furnishing the kinds of proofs demanded by their logic.   
He warns against the dangers in either totally accepting or totally rejecting the philosophers, 
arguing strenuously for an open attitude to truth wherever it appears. Truth is not contaminated by 
being juxtaposed to errors, nor does it become false when included in books which contain errors 
on other matters. Thus, similarities between revealed truths in his works and elements in the works 
of some philosophers do not render the revealed matters any less true.   
In sum, however, Falasifa will not suffice because reason is unable to know the basic truths 
of things, especially (but not only) with regard to the spirit in man and its union with God.   
3. The Theory of Teaching (pp. 84): A competing claimant to provide a sure way to God -- 
and one most obtrusive in his day, even to the point of assassinations -- was the company of those 
who claimed that such truth could not at all be approached by reason, but only through instruction 
by a teacher, particularly by the infallible Imam of the Shi'ites. Ghazali proceeded to develop a 
clearer statement of their principles than could they themselves, but he did so in order to refute 
them. He accepted the principles of the Ta'limites regarding the need for a doctrine and for an 
infallible teacher, but turned this against them by pointing out that such a teacher was only 
Muhammad. More basically, however, he rejected the general skepticism regarding reason implicit 
in their argument and their reduction of faith to blind conformism.   
With regard to the contingent social order, Ghazali considered error to be always possible, but 
not to have eternal implications. Where teaching has been received from an infallible but now dead 
teacher it should be followed; otherwise jurisprudential judgement (ijtihad) must suffice.   
With regard to the fundamental truths of belief, these exist in the Qur'an and the Sunna or 
community. As shown in his book, The Just Balance, these truths can be argued. But, as was true 
even with Muhammad's teaching, there is no guarantee that all persons will be convinced.   
Ghazali argues that the Ta'limit position is not consistent, for the authority of any text which 
would affirm the existence and infallibility of their Imam would need to be based on prophecy and 
certified by miracles.