and men of letters so that his fame spread widely. At 34 he was appointed by Nizam head of the 
Nizamiyya School in Baghdad which he led with great distinction 484-488 (1091-1095).  
At the beginning he was still the brilliant dilettante. Later, from the position of a mature 
wisdom and holiness, he would apologize for the arrogance with which he pursued argumentation 
in that earlier less mature period, when his search was too centered upon honor and fame.   
Farisi reports that at the Nizamiyya he undertook important study in three major directions. 
He researched the science of the roots or sources of jurisprudence ('ilm al-usul); he redeveloped 
the school of Shafi'ite jurisprudence; and he carried out al-khilaf or comparative jurisprudence. On 
all of these he wrote works and acquired a surpassing fame and an entourage.  
This attention to sciences concerned with the concrete and the practical, suggests Jabre, gave 
him the illusion of standing on solid ground and contributing to the realization and defense of a 
human-divine kingdom in this life. He had joined Nizam al-Mulk in his battle against the threat 
of Ta'limism as a new form of Shi'ite Batinism which stressed the essential importance of the 
teaching of the Imam in a different line of succession which went back to very early Muslim 
times.   
This effort received a shattering blow on 10 Ramadan 485/1092 when Nizam al-Mulk, Wazir  
or Prime Minister of the Seljoukide Sultan and patron of Ghazali, was assassinated by a young 
Batinite, as would be the son of Nizam, Fakhr al-Mulk, in 500/1107 fifteen years later.   
According to Aba Bakr ibn al-'Arabi it was early the next year (486/1093-1904) that al Ghazali 
made a definitive conversion to Sufism and turned from the sciences of things here below to those 
of the hidden, transcendent aspects of religion. The character and content of this conversion is the 
centerpiece of the Munqidh. It is no exaggeration to say that all else in the book has been chosen 
and ordered precisely in order to explain that conversion and the new dimension of knowledge 
which was opened to him by the Way of the Sufis.  
It is not possible to say what weight the political facts of his day, particularly the assassination 
of Nizam, had on the conversion of Ghazali. He himself does not refer to them in the Munqidh. 
There he holds to the description of the alternate orders of knowledge or of religion proposed by 
others and to his own thorough investigation and critique of them. By their exclusion he points to 
the Way of the Sufis. This was based not simply on its being the sole remaining speculative 
alternative, but also on the distinction of theory and practice and its implication that it was 
necessary to move beyond speculation to a higher level of experience. This experience provides 
its own positive warranty.  
Some would want to hold only to his own spiritual experience and suggest that the fear which 
he mentions at this time was not fear of a fate similar to that of Nizam, but fear of God, which is 
the beginning of wisdom. This would seem to separate Ghazali from the circumstances of his 
time in which -- if one recognizes the role of Sunnite vs Shi'ite theology as the coordinating matrices 
of the conflicting temporal regimes of the time -- he was centrally engaged.  
Further, this position separates violently soul from body to focus entirely upon disincarnate 
mind. But it is no derogation of the soul and its spiritual journey to place it firmly in matter or 
body, in time or history.