If moralists had not been able to rouse themselves, they would not have been able to defend 
the higher ground of their convictions. The system of morals would have collapsed; virtue would 
have been buried alive; civilization would have become bankrupt.  
Al-Ghazali was "sick" from the people of his time. They were a trial to him. He was not a 
politician but he suffered the bad symptoms that afflict those who deal in politics. He was attacked 
by the germs of hypocrisy which surrounded his fellow scholars. He suffered because of the 
unhealthy differences which existed between Muslim sects, between Sunni and Shiite which had 
reached a dangerous zenith in his day, and because of the corruption among the adherents of 
Sufism and the theologians.  
In his time, the sects that claimed to be part of Islam were at war among themselves. Shia, 
Sunna, Mutazilite, Ismaili, theologians, the patrons of the Brothers of Purity, and the natural 
philosophers, all these, for their differences, were ranged on one side, and Al-Ghazali on the other.  
Knowing that Al-Ghazali suffered all his life from these major symptoms and maladies of his 
society, his own personal maladies seem to us slight in comparison. The great Imam was well 
aware of the link between his own poor health and the sickness of the society which besieged him.  
As a child and as a young man before the age of twenty, he was recklessly ambitious and 
daring. He says that he thirsted after comprehension of things as they really are. This was his 
obsession from an early age; it was instinctive, part of his God-given nature, a matter of 
temperament not of choice or contriving. But the more he progressed into the fields of academic 
and religious thinking of his society, the more he suffered, to the point that at a time of his greatest 
success, when he occupied the highest academic chair in Al-Nizamiyya University in Baghdad, 
teaching 300 students, he lost all desire to continue.  
As has been mentioned before, Al-Ghazali writes about himself, his society, his religion and 
his Sufi experience. His writings shed light on each aspect of his time and display even the trivial 
details of history and the social disparities of his time. In his voluminous encyclopedic work "The 
Revival of the Religious Sciences" he wrote about the religious branches of knowledge and the 
religious communities of his time. We have translated the Book of Knowledge, which is the first 
book of this work and provided it with an introduction.  
Al Munqidh min al-Dalal "The Deliverance from Confusion" may be categorized as 
autobiographical in nature. In this book, Al-Ghazali profiles some highly important information 
about himself as a man and as a thinker, and about his evaluation of contemporary religious 
thinking and trends. For this reason the book is of prime importance. We shall have the opportunity 
to discuss it later.  
In his book Bidayat al-Hidaya (The Beginning of Guidance) also, Al-Ghazali includes 
information about himself and the academic community of his time. Al-Ghazali observed how 
people received his book, Ihya, and replied to criticism of it. He wrote a book about the different 
kinds of boasters, dividing them into groups, discussing and analyzing each in his own way. He 
wrote Mi'yar al-Ilm (The Yardstick of Knowledge) to help confused students and academics 
perceive what knowledge is false, what genuine: what should be accepted, what should be rejected. 
This led the Imam on to write Mizan Al-'Amal (The Yardstick of Action) and Tahafut al-Falasifa 
(Contradictions among the Philosophers).