He also told us that he became for a certain time busy with the counterbalancing of the 
proofs, Takafu' al Adilla, and the minute details of the problems. Then he told us that a door of the 
fear of God opened before him and took all his attention, forcing him to abandon everything else, 
until it became easy for him to accept the other way of religious practice and he then became 
perfectly disciplined and the reality of things became clear to him, and he turned into what we 
expected of him, behaving well with a good character, exact insight. This was the sign of the 
happiness which God had allocated to him before time began.  
Then we asked him about how he had wished to leave his home and return to resume what 
was required of him in Nishabour (to teach in al-Nizamiyyah Academy). He said apologetically, 
"There was no way that my religion would permit me to refuse a request to spread God's message 
for the benefit of students, and indeed it was my duty to reveal the truth and speak about it and call 
others to it."  
Later he abandoned teaching and returned to his home. He built a school beside his house 
where he could receive seekers after knowledge and provide a hostel for Sufis. Thereafter he 
divided his time according to those who would come to him, sometimes reciting the Qur'an, 
sometimes sitting with the Sufis, sometimes teaching, so he did not waste a single moment of his 
time nor of the other people's time.  
In his late years al-Ghazali occupied himself with the study of Hadith, especially Al Bukhari's 
and Muslim's Sahihs, and shortly before his death, al-Ghazali was reading in Sahih al-Bukhari, 
and it was reported that he died while the book was still in his hand. Al-Farisi, adding to the 
statement above, mentioned that, "had al-Ghazali lived longer he would even have ranked higher 
than most eminent in the [Muslim] tradition. Here we shall assemble some of Abd Al-Ghafir's 
statements about al-Ghazali, not necessarily in the order in which they occur: "He is a proof that 
Islam works as a system... the tongue of Islam... the Imam of the Imams of religion... eyes 
have never seen another like him in his ability to speak, his eloquence, expression, quick 
understanding and natural command." (Ibn Asakir, Tabin Kadhib al-Muftari [Beirut, Dar al-Kitab 
al-Arabi, 1979], pp. 291ff.)  
In Nishabour al-Ghazali attended Imam al-Haramayn al-Juwayni's lectures and studied hard 
and graduated in a short time. He outstripped his fellows. He committed the Qur'an to memory 
while still young and became the most able debater of his time and outstanding among the students 
of Imam al-Haramayn. His fellow students benefitted from his teaching and guidance, and he never 
stopped learning. He began to write books. Imam al-Haramayn, despite his high rank and his ability 
to talk fluently, did not regard al-Ghazali with favor when they were alone together. This was 
because al-Ghazali was quick to understand and his teacher was not happy that his student had 
started to compose books so early, although as his teacher it would reflect credit on him.  
This is human nature, though the teacher appeared proud of al-Ghazali in public and 
encouraged his success, but in his heart he nursed jealousy.  
This situation persisted until Imam al-Haramayn died in 478 A.H. (1085 A.D.). And then al-
Ghazali went to Nishabour and attended the assembly of the minister Nizam al-Mulk. The minister 
welcomed him because he ranked high as a scholar among the scholars and great Imams who 
gathered at the minister's court.  
Al-Ghazali, no doubt, had benefited from this great assembly of rival scholars. His name rose 
over the horizon.