of St. Augustine, 
for whom a special light or illumination was needed in order to explain the universality and 
necessity of the human knowledge which man drew from particular and changing reality. In 
response to this position, it was the contribution of Thomas Aquinas to see that the power of God 
implied that his creatures be self-sufficient. This meant that in their own (created) right they 
possessed all the competencies needed in order to realize all the actions which were in accord with 
their nature.16 This extended the power of God proportionately and by participation to all His 
work.   

(This was an important corrective by Thomas to one of the main defects which Ghazali found 
in Averroes. Ghazali was concerned that too close a following of Aristotle led Averroes to 
attenuate the reality of the individual's spiritual soul and to an inadequate affirmation of the 
resurrection on the Last Day. This Ghazali classified as heretical.)17   
For Ghazali the conviction that the realization of truth was the effect of God, not of man, 
meant that the first truths could be looked upon in two ways. If seen in relation to the truth about 
God and constituting part of knowledge about God, they received therefrom truly definitive 
power.   
The first principles could, however, be looked upon in another way, namely, as principles for 
any reasoning to God, or indeed for any reasoning whatsoever. Such knowledge is not certain. 
This is expressed by the phrase "the equivalence of proofs" (takafu' al-adilla) indicating that 
"falsehood on the part of a proof does not entail the falsity of the object it proves." It can apply 
either to the necessary principles and to all properly speculative knowledge or only to the latter, 
all which it blankets with doubt.   
Up to 28 years of age, during the period when Ghazali was introduced to 
philosophy, kalam, fiqh and all the sciences, his mind was molded according to this pattern by his 
teacher, Juwayni, who was among the initiators of this view, which Ibn Khaldun considers the 
distinguishing doctrine between "the ancients" and "the moderns". It is not surprising then that 
Ghazali would be the one to write the Tahafut al-Falasifa and thereby the major figure in the 
discontinuation of the Islamic strain of Greek philosophy. Averroes's belated effort to answer in 
his Tahafut al-tahafut was destined beforehand to be ineffective, for no reasoned reply could be 
effective when reason was no longer held to provide knowledge that was certain.  

The Metaphysics of Mysticism  

Ghazali's epistemology did not change in the second period of his life, beginning from the age 
of 34, when he was placed in charge of the Nizamiyya School in Baghdad. Writing as he does 
from this epistemological perspective, Farid Jabre tends to downplay the philosophical 
significance of this second period.18 He sees it as but a repetition of the first period, though now 
in psychological and phenomenal terms describing Ghazali's lived experience of the limitation of 
reason. To McCarthy, however, it is just the opposite; having reduced Ghazali's first crisis to being 
simply a universal experience of passing from adolescence, he places all the meaning in the second 
phase of his life,19 which all agree to be the main focus of the Munqidh.  
It is suggested here that the truth lies between these two positions.20 That is, the main lines 
of his epistemology can indeed be traced in the earlier period, as Jabre has so effectively done. He 
is correct in observing that during that earlier period Ghazali did not advance beyond the realm of 
reason and that it lacked definitive certainty.