It stated there that "this again is largely due to the charm of his apologia pro vita sua, entitled Deliverance from Error, which he completed two or three years before his death in December 1111. To fill out our understanding of the Islamic world up to 1100 it is well worth looking more closely at al-Ghazali." In his work the Deliverance from Error, al-Ghazali relates how, after a period of skepticism, he resolved to make an active research for ultimate (religious) truth among the rational theologians, the philosophers, the Batinites (i.e., Ismailites) and the Sufis or mystics (The Majesty That Was Islam [London: Sidwick and Jackson, 1974], p. 252f). 

Richard Joseph McCarthy, who brought out another translation of al-Munqidh, holds al-Munqidh as unique in whole classical Arabic and Islamic literature. But McCarthy doubts whether this outstanding book is the first of its kind. Al-Ghazali’s originality in al-Munqidh is in the great tradition of Muslim autobiography or quasi-biographical literature. It is true that before al-Ghazali, Ibn Hazm al-Andalusi wrote his Ring of the Dove, Tawq al-Hamama and al-Akhlaq wa Siyar, in which he provided much autobiographical information. This can be taken in one way or another as internal evidence that al-Ghazali was influenced by Ibn Hazm in this field. Ibn Sina, and al-Farabi before al-Ghazali both had written a large amount of autobiographical material. (Ibn Abi Usibi'a Uyun al-Anba, vol. 3, pp. 3-29 and 223-233.) It is to be noted that autobiography is not an independent Islamic genre or branch of knowledge.

The rhetoric and genre of al-Ghazali in al-Munqidh was favorably compared with that of the English academic theologian and activist, John Henry Newman, of the nineteenth century Oxford movement. Though Frick more cautiously refers to it as an apologia pro doctrina sua, McCarthy still thinks that al-Munqidh possesses its own uniqueness for reasons which are self-evident and self-proclaimed.

Rick more cautiously refers to it as an "apologia pro doctrina sua", McCarthy 
still thinks that al-Munqidh possesses its own uniqueness for reasons which are self-evident and 
self-proclaimed.