Line: what should be accepted, what should be rejected. 
This led the Imam on to write Mizan Al-'amal (The Yardstick of Action) and Tahafut al-Falasifa 
(Contradictions among the Philosophers).  
We have listed these titles not in order to show how many books al-Ghazali wrote, but rather 
to show how each volume was intended to deal with a problem and with problem-makers of his 
time.  
Although Imam Ghazali lived in difficult times we should not overlook the fact that this gave 
rise to his greatness. If his time was one of political upheaval and internal dispute in religion and 
sectarian factions, it was also a time of great scholars, and a time when knowledge was honored 
and learned men were respected and well paid. It was a time when a few chosen scholars could  
silence the hypocritical masses and purveyors of falsehood.  
Al-Munqidh min al-Dalal reflects al-Ghazali's life and his own spiritual experience and 
development. There is no doubt at all about its authorship, but some critics have argued against its 
value as a historical document, as we shall see later.  
Al-Ghazali took issue with the scholars of the Batinyya sect, criticizing their principles and 
doctrines. He wrote several books about them and refers to some of them in the book translated 
here. This should add to his credibility as a sign of his courage in facing up to such dangerous 
opponents. We should keep this in mind when we turn to al-Ghazali's political stance, which some 
critics have not taken into account. Defense of religion means defense of the state and of society 
as a whole.  
From the title and introduction we can draw further insights. Al-Ghazali was familiar with the 
causes of the confusion and error that had befallen the nation. He says that most of the mistakes of 
the thinkers of his day came from believing what they had heard and were familiar with from 
childhood, having received it from their fathers, teachers and people regarded as virtuous. Al-
Ghazali had come to doubt what he had been told, and he urges others to doubt, as the reader of 
the present work will find.  
Moreover, al-Ghazali says that "anyone who does not doubt will not investigate, and anyone 
who does not investigate cannot see, and anyone who does not see will remain in blindness and 
error." Al-Ghazali, here as elsewhere, considers skepticism as a source of knowledge and 
discovery because anybody who blindly accepts is not investigating or fathoming what he accepts. 
As a matter of fact, the Qur'an urged people to doubt their father's beliefs, traditions and customs. 
Many verses of the Qur'an say that Allah, referring to Himself, asks people if they have any doubts 
about His creations. This means that Allah expects people to doubt. Doubt can lead to a firmer 
belief, unless it is a symptom of a mental illness or spiritual disturbance. Faith in Allah can be 
deep-seated in the heart, but the heart still requires psychological reassurance, as in the case of 
Abraham when he asked Allah how he could give life to the dead. Allah told him, "Don't you 
believe?" "Yes indeed, but my heart needs to be at peace." This Gnostic method featured later in 
the work of Descartes, in fact is central to Descartes's philosophy.  
Al-Ghazali occupies a unique position among Islamic philosophers in recommending doubt 
within the boundary of faith. He was original and pioneering.  
As we have already said, some critics have argued about the historical value of 
the Deliverance from Error. Some went as far as to say that it was intended as a novel, with himself 
as the central figure of the novel, a Bildungsroman (a development novel) as the Germans call this 
genre. These critics regard the book not as a true record of his real life and development, but as a 
fictional account written when he had finished developing.