and gives it ultimate meaning. One would hope then that he would have written much more extensively about his lived experience of the Way during his retreat following his departure from Baghdad. But, of course, he has done this brilliantly and in the greatest detail in the 40 books of the Ihya; it is there that one must turn for the enduring harvest of his life of faith. 

The Impact of the Munqidh: Past and Present 

For Islam, the impact of the Munqidh was decisive, especially if one includes the pattern of work it reflects, including Ghazali's decisive critique of philosophy in the Tahafut, his description of the discovery of the mystical way through a critique of the sciences, including kalam, in the Munqidh itself, and the massively imposing Ihya with its detailed exposition of the spiritual wisdom gained from his decade-long Sufi retreat. It is not without reason that Ghazali has been described as the greatest Muslim after Muhammad himself. 

As the classical sciences of kalam and fiqh had come to appear respectively as too apologetic and too external, there was an urgent need to renew access to the religious wellsprings of Islam. The obvious candidate for such an expedition was reason. This had been developed to a high state by the Greeks, whose major works had been translated into Arabic. It had been richly developed by such ingenious Islamic thinkers as al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, and Averroes. But was reason enough -- particularly as developed in terms of a culture of the ancient Greek gods, rather than the revelation of the One God? Three responses were possible. 

The first, by Ibn Sina and Averroes, was that reason could be of great assistance in this effort to discover the religious meaning of life and to order all life in that light. Indeed, their great works illustrate this point so well that no external certification of their significance need be added to that which shines from within. 

There is, however, a fatal weakness in human reason. As human, it is limited and can never be adequate to the divine which transcends it. Yet, as reason, it looks for universal principles and laws which order all and render all intelligible to a limited mind. This tension shows up most in the Platonic and neo-Platonic line of Greek reasoning upon which, especially, the Islamic philosophers drew. The result was a tendency to tailor such realities as the "assemblage" or "resurrection" of the body on the last day and the personal spiritual principle to categories which were not really adequate to the task. Ghazali drew up a list of twenty such points, three of which he cites in the Munqidh. Ghazali's judgment in the Tahafut that this avenue was simply too dangerous to the integrity of revelation and should effectively be abandoned was accepted, despite the somewhat later protestations of Averroes. 

The second was that of Ghazali himself. In three years of work on the philosophers, he quite mastered their work and indeed wrote one of the major summaries of their thought for his time, the Maqasid al-Falasifa. In the end, he felt, nonetheless, that he needed to abandon that avenue as well as Kalam, his teaching of fiqh and, of course, the position of the ta'limites, for by exclusion he could see clearly that he must devote himself to the mystical Way of the Sufis. This led precisely beyond objective reason to an interior path of abnegation until his heart could open to a divine embrace so intimate and life-giving that it could actively be savored. 

The impact upon Islam of this step, so effectively presented in the Munqidh, was of the highest order. Matching the turn away from Greek philosophy, there came a new appreciation of the spiritual and mystical dimension of Islam. However, while Ghazali's work leaves no question about the need to go beyond the sciences in faith, it is not iconoclastic.