A scholar among the scholars and great Imams who 
gathered at the minister's court.  
Al-Ghazali, no doubt, had benefited from this great assembly of rival scholars. His name rose 
over the horizon. Later, Al-Ghazali moved to Baghdad to teach again in the academy during the 
ministry of Fakhr al-Mulk. Everybody there admired his teaching and skill in debating, and he did 
not find anyone his equal. After he had been the Imam of Khurasan, he became by then the Imam 
of Iraq. In this time, Al-Ghazali wrote excellent books about Fiqh, Islamic Jurisprudence and its 

methodology. His fame now ranked higher in Baghdad so that it even outranked that of princes 
and officials of the caliphate administration.  
But suddenly everything turned. He abandoned it all and gave up everything he suffered to 
attain in life and occupied himself wholly with religious duties and activities directed to the 
hereafter. He went to perform pilgrimage; then he went to Syria and remained there for ten years. 
While there he wrote such well-known and original writings as Ihya Ulum al-Din, the revival of 
religious knowledge. 
He strove against his soul and his own behavior in order to perfect his own character and to 
cultivate his manner. Every bad quality in Al-Ghazali turned into a good one. He turned away from 
seeking fame and material gain and clothed himself in the garments of the righteous.  
He scaled down his hopes in this world and devoted his time to guiding people to do what 
would benefit them in the hereafter, to make this world abhorrent to them, and to make them 
prepare for the long journey to the everlasting abode.  
When he went back home, he busied himself with contemplation. He was visited by many 
people. He was a treasure supplying people's hearts with piety and guidance. His writings and 
books were widely disseminated and there was no contradiction between what he taught and how 
he lived.  
No one objected to his teachings, and when Fakhr al-Mulk became a minister and heard of Al-
Ghazali and admired his extensive knowledge, virtuous character, pure faith, and sociability, he 
sought blessings from him, attended his classes and listened to his lectures. Then he asked him to 
return to teaching in the academy, so that his precious knowledge and fruitful learning should not 
be locked away without benefiting anyone. He begged him to accept his request and Al-Ghazali 
finally fulfilled his wishes and went to Nishabour to teach in al-Nizamiyyah.  
This statement is a very important one which has not been given enough attention by Al-
Ghazali's biographers and critics. It is unfortunate that we cannot put a precise date between Al-
Ghazali and Abd Al-Ghafir. However, it is possible to say that it occurred before Al-Ghazali finally 
withdrew from public life, and it is clear that no reference is made in this statement to Al-Ghazali's 
book al-Munqidh either as already written, nor did he mention any intention of writing it.  
This is a definite indication that the book dates from later in Al-Ghazali's life. Even more 
importantly, Abd Al-Ghafir asked him why he left his post in Baghdad and stopped teaching in al-
Nizamiyya. This is the precise question that appears at the beginning of al-Munqidh, and the whole 
conversation is more or less reproduced in the introduction of the book.  
Al-Ghazali tells us in the very first line that he wrote his book in response to a brother in the 
faith who had requested him to do so. We feel quite justified in saying that this brother in the faith 
was a real person not a fiction, or a literary device as McCarthy suggests, and not Al-Ghazali 
himself as Abd al-Jalil al-Baqari assumed. We may even venture to assert that the brother in faith 
was Abd al-Ghafir al Farisi himself or at least one of the people who attended the same meeting.