As to McCarthy’s own translation, it is accompanied by a long and useful introduction about 
al-Ghazali and al-Munqidh, and with appendices and annotations. The introduction is sixty pages, 
the translation fifty-three pages, the annotations of twenty-eight pages, and the indispensable 
appendices stretch from p. 145 to p. 297 of the book containing a translation of other works by al-
Ghazali mentioned in the book.  
McCarthy’s annotations are useful for lay readers and non-academics. They introduce some 
biographical information about the personalities mentioned in al-Munqidh. In some instances, 
McCarthy overburdens the text with comments which are merely superficial. Most of the time he 
refers the reader to secondary sources. McCarthy attempts to refer the hadith to their original 
source, but often fails, e.g., he misinterpreted the hadith concerning the Muslim sects in a way that 
contradicts the original. Sometimes the notes complicate, rather than elucidate.  
McCarthy worked intensively on Jabri and Burgi’s translation (e.g., vide p. xxix) and utilized 
to a certain extent the available translations of al-Munqidh, including those in Dutch and Turkish. 
He specifically mentioned Field’s and Watt’s translations.  
He based his translation on the Arabic text printed by Jamil Salibah and Kamel Ayyad, which 
was used also for Jabri’s French translation and Watt's translation. Notwithstanding all this, he 
perused the Shahid Ali Basha’s manuscript dated 509 A.H. (1115-1116 A.D.) i.e. five years after 
al-Ghazali's death, which we have also used in our translation together with another good, yet 
incomplete manuscript (Taymur, Bash, Egypt-National Library).  
For the first time, I am introducing my edition of al-Munqidh in its Arabic original; the 
translation here is based on my own edition.  
This translation, though not the first one, certainly is the first by a Muslim who stands very 
close to al-Ghazali’s personality and spirit. The translation, it is hoped, reads smoothly and carries 
much of al-Ghazali’s style, warmth and stamina in the sphere of learning and truth.

Close to Al-Ghazali's personality and spirit. The translation, it is hoped, reads smoothly and carries much of Al-Ghazali's style, warmth, and stamina in the sphere of learning and truth.

Editor's Introduction  
George F. McLean

The Context

In order to understand a person's life, it is usually helpful to know something of his or her social, political, and cultural contexts. How important this is depends, on the one hand, upon theoretical considerations and, on the other hand, upon the person him or herself. The theoretical issue is the extent to which a person is understood in terms of interiority vis-à-vis in terms of openness and relation to others. Indeed, deep reflection suggests that the degree of one's interiority and reflective self-possession is the key to one's ability to relate to others with that free and passionate sense of justice which is the fruit of love. This is important for a personal history. Without this balanced sense of the person, on the one hand, a life would be interpreted simply in terms of external events or powerful political authorities, in relation to whose concerns the individual is but a marionette. Worse still, any claim to personal and free decision making would be interpreted as fraud or deceit. On the other hand, that same life could be interpreted in a simply self-reflective manner, reducing it to egoistic self-seeking, missing its social concern and impact, and -- even more -- losing the significance of personal and religious interiority for the life of society as a whole.