Reforming society, correcting the rulers, and defending the people's human rights is the responsibility of the scholars and learned men. (See al-Subki, Tabaqat, vol. 4, p. 110. Also F.R.C. Bagley al-Ghazali's Book of Council for Kings [London, 1964].)  
Another trend of criticism leveled at al-Ghazali is that he retreated from public life for eleven years, leaving his people without the benefit of his advice.  
He should not be blamed for this, for he was preparing himself for a greater role later. Prophets and scholars of higher repute withdrew from society for long periods. It is obvious that our great Imam was inclined by nature to keep his distance. He perceived that mixing with people brings trouble. In his book Ihya, he wrote about the privileges of seclusion.  
According to al-Manawi, al-Ghazali says in a poem, "In mixing with people there is no benefit, and ignorance about the reality of things is not like a scholar. You who ignorantly criticize me for keeping away from people, my reason [for doing this] is engraved on my ring." When they read the inscription on his ring they found this verse, "For the most of them we did not find any commitment to principle. We find that most of them are faithless" (Qur'an 7: 102).   

Intellectual Milieu   

Following the intellectual climate vividly referred to by al-Ghazali, one is much impressed to see that al-Ghazali became a meteor in the galaxy of the greatest scholars and divines of his time.  

To cite but a few examples of al-Ghazali’s great contemporaries: Imam Al-Haramayn, Abu al-Ma’ali Abd al-Malik Al-Juwayni (d. 478 A.H./1085 A.D.), the mentor who discovered the young genius in al-Ghazali and is rightly his moral and scholarly patron, as well as of the Nishapur Academy, established also by Nizam al-Mulk, in addition to heading many other institutions of teaching.  
Abu Ishaq al-Shirazi (418 A.H./1027 A.D.) who also headed Nizamia academy at Baghdad.  
Abd al-Salam Ibn Yusuf of Nishapur, Ibn Yusuf al-Qazwini (d. 482 A.H./1089 A.D.), the head of the Mu’tazilite school, who wrote a commentary on the Qur’an in seven hundred volumes.  
Abu Turab, the head and the Mufti of Asharite in Nishapur (d. 492 A.H./1098 A.D.).  
Abu Muhammad al-Misri (d. 486 A.H./1093 A.D.).  
Abu Ali Ibn Ahmad al-Waqidi (d. 468 A.H./1075 A.D.).  
Abu Bakr al-Bayhaqi (d. 458 A.H./1065 A.D.).  
Abu Ali al-Husayn Ibn Abd Allah, Ibn Sina, known in the West as Avicenna, the greatest of Muslim philosophers, (370-428 A.H./980-1037 A.D.), and his disciple Abu Abd Allah al-Masumi about whom Ibn Sina says, "Al-Masumi is to me what Aristotle is to Plato" (ibid., p. 230).  
Omar al-Khayyam, the Persian Astronomer and poet already mentioned in the introduction.  
On the Sufi side, al-Ghazali was a contemporary and quite aware of the following great figures:  
Abu Ali al-Daqqaq (d. 415 A.H./1024 A.D.).  
Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami the Sufi Qur’an interpreter, historian and chronicler.  
Abu al-Abbas al-Qassar.  
Abu al-Qasim al-Qushayri, the writer of the celebrated Risala (Epistle) on Sufism and the sufis. It is worth noting that the author of al-Munqidh made reference to only two of the most eminent Muslim philosophers: Abu Nasr al-Farabi (d. 339 A.H./950 A.D.), usually called the second teacher, after Aristotle, and al-Muallim al-Thani, known in the West as Averroes and as an interpreter of Aristotle.  
Ibn Sina deserves special attention here, since he is al-Ghazali’s contemporary, and was singled out by him as a specimen for moral criticism when he pinpointed the will in which Ibn Sina recorded his confession of drinking alcohol and his pledge that he would never take the draught unless as medicine.  
It is evident that Ibn Sina was fond of banquets, luxury and being entertained.