Al-Ghazali's full name is Abu Hamid Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ahmad al-Tusi al-
Ghazali (450-505 A.H./1058-1111 A.D.). In Latin his name was Algazel. He was known as the 
proof and ornament of Islam. He was an encyclopedic author, polymath, a great jurist, theorist, 
philosopher, theologian, moralist, critic, comparative religionist; above all, he was a religious 
reformer and spiritual revivalist who sacrificed himself completely to his belief and ideal.  
He was born in Tus near Mashad, Persia (now Iran). Having gained an excellent reputation as 
a scholar, he was appointed in 484 A.H. (1091 A.D.) by the Seljuk minister Nizam al-Mulk to 
teach at Nizamiyya Academy which was founded by him in Baghdad. At this great city al-
Ghazali's followers grew in number until they outnumbered even the retinues of the emirs and 
magnates (al-Safadi, al-Wafi, bi al-Wafayat, ed. H. Ritter et al. [Wisbaden, 1962], pp. 274-277). 
Al-Ghazali proved a great and influential lecturer in that institute. But in the month of Dhu'l Qa'da 
in the year 488 A.H. (1095 A.D.) after enduring a personal crisis he gave up the entirety of his 
worldly position and led the way of renunciation and solitude. He performed the pilgrimage, and, 
upon his return visited Syria and lived there for some time in the city of Damascus. Thereafter he 
visited Jerusalem passing his time in worship, learning, contemplation and writing. After a life 
filled with great intellectual and spiritual achievements al-Ghazali died on Monday, the fourteenth 
of Jumada al-Akhira in the year 505 (1111) at Tabaran, the citadel (qasba) of Tus, where he was 
interred.  
Al-Ghazali's writings, whether biographical or of general academic content, hold a faithful 
mirror to the society of his time and to his own person. From his writings we may glean not only 
details of his life, but also valuable information about his psychology and character.  
Al-Ghazali is not a merely theoretical writer. He illustrates his arguments with real examples, 
and his advice is based on his own experience. He was writing to people who were known to him 
and whose needs he knew very well. He was one of the greatest Imams in the field of reformation, 
and as such he suffered from what we may call the sickness of his society and paid for it.  
Great reformers have their sicknesses and sorrows, not because of their own state of health, 
but because the state of their nation drags them down and makes them feel ill. Their illnesses come 
from the social, moral and behavioral sicknesses of their society, from the sickbed of the nation, 
when it strays from the right path.  
Great people have suffered more from this kind of illness than from their own physical 
symptoms. Any physical sicknesses they had were slight compared with the sickness that came to 
them from contemplating their society.  
The great man is a gift from God to his society, and a gift from God may be accepted or  
denied. Al-Ghazali was both son and father to his society. He gave to it more than he took out. He 
continued his struggle against evil forces, ill-thinking, and false assumptions which traded in the 
name of Islam until death forced him to stop. He was not defeated by the persecution which his 
efforts brought upon him. He did not buckle under criticism; rather, it gave him added strength to 
stand his ground and to make his voice heard in all places and at all times.

Persecution which his 
efforts brought upon him. He did not buckle under criticism; rather, it gave him added strength to 
stand his ground and to make his voice heard in all places and at all times.