tower of scholasticism to the tangible and palpable reality of religion. To establish this, al-Ghazali had to 
wrestle with exponents of sectarian thinking and speculative theologians and jurists.  
Concerning MacDonald’s second point, it is worth noting that al-Ghazali, through emphasizing 
the importance and effect of the fear of Allah, also emphasized, on the other hand, the importance 
of hope in salvation. In his own simile, “Hope and fear are like two wings by which one can fly and 
attain the divine satisfaction and solace. They are like two mounts on which every steep ascent of 
the paths of the next world is traversed.” 
A deeper insight of al-Ghazali’s literature on fear is that the fear of the creator leads to an even 
greater hope in Him; and hope alone, without fear, cannot lead to bliss and paradise. Fear is a 
natural propensity without which, man cannot attain his equilibrium.  
Indeed, it is true that al-Ghazali’s analysis of fear is more elaborate than that of hope, and that 
he devoted a great deal of his book to it. This is partly because of his belief that fear has the greater 
relevance in the contemporary situation, but it is also accounted for by its place in al-Ghazali’s 
Gnostic or mystical themes, and its importance for his theology of which predestination is the 
cornerstone. To our Imam, fear is well connected with the knowledge of God: when knowledge of 
God is perfected, the majesty of fear and the conflagration of the heart are produced. Then the 

trace of conflagration rushes from the heart to the body and behavior (ibid., p. 27). It is perhaps 
because of this mode of writing that Malise Ruthven sees in al-Ghazali’s writings a sense of 
sadness and seriousness; he says, “Ghazali’s work lays down the role of an earnest, somewhat 
joyless religiosity, pregnant with gravitas and unleavened by humor” (Islam in the 
World [London: Penguin Books, 1991], p. 241). To illustrate this, he refers to the 
following hadith cited by al-Ghazali in his book al-Ihyaa, “The man who speaks a word to make 
his friends laugh is thereby hurled into the pit of hell for seventy years.”  
In his book, Islam p. 94, H.A.R. Gibb, says that al-Ghazali, “is a man who stands on a level 
with Augustine and Luther in religious insight and intellectual vigor.” Yet in our view, he stands 
head and shoulders above them since he is more universal than restricting himself to one creed.  
To Ignaz Goldziher al-Ghazali, “is one of the most epoch-making personalities.”  
In his contribution to Religion in the Middle East: Sufism, Martin Lings holds al-Ghazali as 
the most famous among those Sufis who had bridged the chasm between Sufism and the rest of 
the Islamic community. Lings says, “Al-Ghazali... the great Shafi’i canonist and theologian who 
devoted his latter years to mystic paths and who wrote an autobiographical treatise, The Savior 
from Error (al-Munqidh min al-Dalal) in praise of Sufism as the only sure antidote to skepticism 
and as the highest way to life” (vol. II, p. 264).  
To Montgomery Watt who has translated al-Munqidh together with Bidayat al-Hidaya into 
English, “Al-Ghazali is one of the Muslim thinkers, though, perhaps over-esteemed in the West.”  
The reason in Watt’s statement that the Westerners find it easier to be sympathetic with him 
requires more explanation. Certainly, al-Ghazali deserves to be loved and appeals to all who have 
noble and fair minds. Watt himself nuanced his statement as appears in his article on al-Ghazali in 
the new edition of the Islamic Encyclopedia. 
Referring to the appeal of al-Munqidh, Watt stated there that “this again is largely due to the 
charm of his apologia pro vita sua, entitled Deliverance from Error, which he completed two or 
three years before his death in December 1111.