that the period of his leadership 
of the school at Baghdad. Particularly, it reflects the point at which he comes seriously to 
investigate the adequacy of the sciences and schools of thought. From this point of view, the work 
-- and his life -- clearly divide into two parts: the first is preliminary and is devoted to the basis for 
scientific reasoning, the second main section is devoted to questioning these bases with a view to 
showing the need, the nature, and the goal of the Way of the Sufis.   
Each phase is marked by a personal crisis, the first of which foreshadows the second. 
McCarthy downplays the first as the relatively universal step of the late adolescent forced to take 
up responsibility for his or her own capacity of knowledge. In contrast, Jabre, as it were, 
places a magnifying glass on this first crisis in order to uncover much more precisely the nature of 
the epistemology which Ghazali developed for human reason. This would remain with him 
throughout his life and would be the point of reference against which he would delineate the further 
step to the mystical and the prophetic.  
Further, because Ghazali later notes that he never doubted the great truths of the faith, Jabre 
would distinguish this first crisis from Descartes's universal doubt and limit it to the motives of 
credibility of faith before the judgment of reason. But if Descartes could stress the importance of 
keeping one's fundamental beliefs even while applying the technique of his methodic doubt, the 
young Ghazali could claim to have done no less in his own general state of initial confusion.   
Jabre would focus Ghazali's early crisis on the rational means or motives which justify belief 
and considers that this defines all that follow. In contrast, Ghazali himself seems there to describe 
a more general crisis regarding the validity of reason. This is but an introductory first step toward 
the general epistemological question which he evolves later in the main body of the text. It is there

General crisis regarding the validity of reason. This is but an introductory first step toward 
the general epistemological question which he evolves later in the main body of the text. It is there