Earlier period, as Jabre has so effectively done. He 
is correct in observing that during that earlier period Ghazali did not advance beyond the realm of 
reason and that it lacked definitive certainty. But if that be so, when in the second period he does 
actively apply himself to the Way that leads beyond reason, identifies its veracity, and then applies 
himself in a ten-year retreat to the assiduous practice of the Way from which results his Ihya, the 
landmark of Islamic spirituality, certainly something of the greatest moment has taken place. It is 
hardly a mere "répétition de la première . . . sous un autre form,"21 as claims Jabre. His failure to 
appreciate the distinctive reality of the achievement of the second phase of Ghazali's life would 
seem to result from seeing it only in psychological terms as the flow of phenomena of a human 
order, rather than appreciating it in metaphysical terms, e.g., of a Heidegger, as the unveiling of 
Being Itself through the intentional life of dasein, or in the properly mystical terms which 
McCarthy approaches with great respect, even awe, as before a sanctuary of the divine. This 

enables McCarthy to grasp the tremendous fascination of the religious event lived by Ghazali and 
described in the main body of his text.22   
If the Munqidh has a consistent message, it is that at its highest reason remains insufficient 
and that even in its efforts to defend religion in the Kalam it is weak and largely ineffectual.  
 One cannot come to the reality of the divine in the depth of the human heart by mere belief 
according to dogmatic formula, for they remain surface, brittle and subject to dissolution. The 
approach to the divine is rather by ascetic and ritual practices which progressively remove the 
chains that bind the heart so as to allow it to open before the corresponding unveiling of the divine. 
It is in this that one comes to certain knowledge (yaqin), rising above religious conformism (taqlid) 
through actively savoring the experience of God. Here, reason as prepared by the practices of cult 
and informed by meditation upon the prophetic teaching, has only to reflect upon itself as a 
concrete reality.   
In contrast to the objective and relatively exterior stance of pure speculative reason which can 
lead only to I'tiqad, Ghazali insists that in the mystical Way of the Sufi's the divine is seized 
immediately and savored. He stresses thus the interiority and lived subjectivity of this process. 
This accords with his description of certainty as a state of soul so bound to, and satisfied by, its 
object that nothing could detach it therefore. Even more, it is real union with God and definitive 
fulfillment, of which the certainty is but a sign.  
 In this light it is possible to appreciate more deeply the meaning of the Munqidh. It is not only 
a gripping account of a psychological drama with deep sonorities lived by Ghazali in Baghdad. 
His discovery upon their review that all other ways were wanting -- philosophy, kalam and 
especially taqlid -- and his being led thereby to the Sufi Way of self-abnegation and union with 
God was not only the progression of the life of one person. Beyond this it is a description of the 
Way of continued emergence of the divine in time through prophecy and of the opening of hearts 
thereto through the mystical path. It is truly an account of God with us, which transforms human 
life and history.  
 One who appreciated the implications of this less thoroughly and less deeply than Ghazali 
would have worked out some pragmatic compromise allowing him to stay in Baghdad -- after all, 
as a spiritually sensitive director he would be better for the school than he had been when he acted 
too much on the basis of human reason and for the too human motives of fame and honor. It is 
testimony to his sincerity and charity that he could not act on the basis of any such compromise.