himself as Abd al-Jalil al-Baqari assumed. We may even venture to assert that the brother in faith 
was Abd al-Ghafir al Farisi himself or at least one of the people who attended the same meeting.  
Another line of criticism which is leveled against al-Ghazali is that he did not take an active 
part in the wars between the crusaders and Muslims in his time. The army of the crusaders 
entered Antioch in Syria in 491 A.H. (1097 A.D.) 100,000 Muslims were killed in 495 A.H. (1101 
A.D.). The Western forces captured Jerusalem and remained in control there for eleven years, but 
there is no mention of this in the writings of al-Ghazali. This is strange when one bears in mind 
that he did mention dates close to these when speaking of his own career. He did speak about 
eminent figures such as Ibn Hanbal, Ibn Hazm, Ibn Taymiyya, who were prominent in the struggle 
against political decay and corruption among the caliphs. I do not personally agree with the critics 
who accuse al-Ghazali of ignoring political events. He did care about the Muslim nation, its 

religious stand and political supremacy. It is absurd to say that al-Ghazali welcomed the invasion 
of Syria or felt happy about the mass killing of Muslims; it would be naive to think this.  
A great personality can be perfect in one or more areas of life or of knowledge. This is true of 
al-Ghazali's personality when it is examined closely. His character blossomed in the fields of 
scholarship, religion and social reform, particularly education. He was effective in restating the 
intellectual and spiritual basis of his time. He stood firm against the eminent representatives of the 
various sects and the authorities of his time (especially the Batinites, who threatened the lives of 
their opponents with violence and assassination). In support of this point it is useful to refer to Abd 
al-Qahir al-Baghdadi (d.429 A.H./1037 A.D.) who said that in his time the Batinites presented the 
most evil force and dangerous threat to Islam and Muslims (Usul al-Din, p. 329-331).  
Al-Ghazali was uncompromising in his attitude toward them. He wrote several books 
attacking the Batinites. In turn, they must have attacked him and even threatened his life -- his 
constant move from place to place may lend support to this. Bearing this in mind, such a man 
cannot be accused of cowardice or opting-out. Al-Ghazali took issue with the scholars of his time, 
especially the corrupt ones, emphasizing the importance of a good education for children since 
they are the basis and the new force of society. A society can be made strong through its children. 
Neglect of their education leads to a hypocritical, careless, faithless and loose generation of adults, 
corrupt rulers and cowardly army officers.  
The author under review seems to have concentrated his attention on the source of corruption 
and decay in society, rather than upon the symptoms.  
Al-Ghazali had a good relationship with the rulers of his time but did not hesitate to advise 
them when he saw fit. It should be noted, however, that as a Sufi he criticized the scholars for 
consorting with rulers, but cannot be criticized for doing this very thing due to his integrity and 
drawing no advantage from their company. He lived a hard life until his death and never accepted 
the gifts of money that were offered. Rulers have to be supported, advised and corrected. They 
must not be left without scholarly and religious guidance, lest their views become narrow and they 
be surrounded by hypocrites and faithless opportunists. Reforming the society, correcting the 
rulers and defending the people's human rights is the responsibility of the scholars and learned 
men. (See al-Subki, Tabaqat, vol. 4, p. 110. Also F.R.C.