sense, who called it impossible.  
The senses say to the mind, "Stop here."  
This is because the senses deny You, O God, as a  
picture to be seen, and the mind sees You through abstract evidence.  
. . . 
Indeed, I am so busy with the cultivation of my soul, 
and my business helps me to control myself.  

The doubt of transitory things has been cast away from me  
By a witness that comes like a beacon to me.  
By it, I have seen the Godly light very clear  
from behind delicate screens that cover things,  
then I became certain about the things  
That previously I doubted.  
And I have seen what was secret and hidden [to me]  
And I have known the aim of my creation, the reason for my existence.  
My death and my resurrection  
By the mirror of the soul in whose bright surface there appeared  
this world and the hereafter, the whole truth, every aspect of the truth.  
I know that no shade of doubt remained with me about the things  
that make some people very doubtful.  
The soul took its travelling staff and became sure that my light had  
shone on the right road for me . . .  
My light had shone over the face of my resting place as  
evidence of what I have said. There is the state of sleep,  
when the senses slip away while you rest, and the tablet of the unseen faces the soul like two 
bright  
mirrors, and what the tablet contains is reflected into the soul.  
Then my soul takes its knowledge from there,  
and the knowledge that I have is a copy of what is there.   

This example can of course be multiplied. Al-Ghazali was quite aware of his greatness, and 
we cannot take this as false self-importance.  
He did show signs of arrogance and boastfulness, especially in his youth. Here and there he 
mentions something concerning his personality and experiences, not only in writing but also in 
conversation as referred to above. Moreover, the earliest of his biographers, Abd Al-Ghafir al-
Farisi (d. 529 A.H./1134 A.D.) wrote the following eighteen years after al-Ghazali's death.  
He related to us on certain nights what his circumstances had been from the time he first 
openly followed the path of godliness and the mystical experience overcame him after he delved 
deeply into the various branches of knowledge and that he had behaved arrogantly to everybody, 
when he spoke boasting of how God's favor had singled him out, enabling him to master many 
kinds of knowledge and research them.  
He continued in this way until he felt disgust with the Arabic sciences which were not 
concerned with the hereafter and final goal, and what benefits and helps in the hereafter.  
He had begun his asceticism under the guidance and companionship of al-Farmadhi. From 
him, he learned how to open up the gates to Sophism -- Tariqa -- and followed his instructions 
about the performance of the duties of worship, of extra night-prayers, and of continual invocation 
of God's name.  
He continued in this way until he had overcome all these obstacles. He took on these burdens, 
but he did not achieve what he wanted. Then he related that he had studied every branch of 
knowledge and delved deeply into all aspects of learning and experience, and had again put all his 
strength and made every effort to study every complicated part of the sciences.  
He proceeded to the interpretation of these works and continued to do so until he had unlocked 
the doors to every branch of knowledge.

His effort to study every complicated part of the sciences.  
He proceeded to the interpretation of these works and continued to do so until he had unlocked 
the doors to every branch of knowledge.