later, declining period of this caliphate that Ghazali lived (1058 -1111 A.D., or the years 450 -505 
A.H. counting from Muhammad's Hegira or trek from Mecca to Medina).  
The guard of the Abbasid Caliphs, which was drawn from foreign, especially Turkish, 
elements assumed the real political power. They were replaced by the Persian Buwayhides from 
945-1055, who were replaced in turn for a century by the Turkish Seljuks, when the Caliph 
al-Qa'im, recognized Toghrul Beg as Sultan in Baghdad. This began a line which for a century 
would rule the vast expanse from the Mediterranean to Afghanistan.  
During this time, which was that of Ghazali, a strong attempt was underway by the Fatimids 
of Egypt to supplant the Sunni Abbasid Caliphs in order to assume the religious and political 
leadership of all Islam. Claiming to be descendants of Ali, successor of Muhammad, and Fatima, 
his daughter, they brought together the Shi'ite Alides and conquered North Africa, 
where Cairo became their capital. Their intent was to dominate Iraq, Syria, Khorasan and the 
entire Abbasid empire. To this end Hassan Sabbah, founder of Batinism ta'limite, a new form of 
Isma'ilism, sent emissaries against the Sunni Muslims.   
Among these there were assassins whose most famous victims were Nizam al-Mulk, Wazir to 
Sultan Malikshah, and his son, Fakhr al-Mulk. It had been the custom of the learned Nizam al-
Mulk to have among his court a group of famous jurists and theologians. By teaching Shafi'ism 
and Ash'arism they provided a counterforce against the Shi'ism of the Fatimids in favor of the 
Sunni Abbasids and the Seljuks. To this end he founded many schools, led by that 
in Baghdad. It was precisely as director of this school that he appointed al-Ghazali in 484/1091. 
In the religio-political complex of Islam at that time, this was the critical post.   

Life of Ghazali  

The earliest biography of Ghazali is by 'Abd al-Ghafir al-Farisi who knew personally 
"Muhammad son of Muhammad son of Muhammad Aba Hamid al-Ghazali." He was born in Tus 
(450/1058) and began his studies in fiqh (Islamic law) there in the school of Radkana. Hence, he 
moved to Jurjan under Abu'l-Qasim al-Isma'ili. Finally he became an outstanding student at 
Nishapur under, among others, al-Juwayni, Sunni Imam al-Haramayn. His studies included law, 
jurisprudence, dialectics, religion and logic, reading works on hikma and falsafa. 
After some time he experienced some distaste for the abstract sciences and turned toward the 
Sufi religious approach under Faramdhi, (died 477), one of the most famous shaykhs of the time. 
Though he followed the religious practices of cult and ejaculatory prayer and overcame the 
obstacles, he did not achieve the religious experiences he sought, so he returned then to the abstract 
sciences.  
In epistemology he held all proofs to be equally valid, which left him bemired in casuistry: a 
brilliant dilettante, but without bases for certitude regarding the three great truths, namely, the 
existence of God, the last judgment, and prophecy. Fiqh does not justify these fundamental beliefs, 
but supposes them. Ghazali excelled in reasoning (anzar) and argumentation and early began to 
write his own works. But this dilettantism may have been the reason why his famous teacher al-
Juwayni came to be somewhat put off by the brilliant but aggressive argumentation of his student.  
Upon the deaths of Faramdhi and of al-Juwayni in 478, his education was complete. He was 
the sole major heir to the cultural tradition of his native Khorasan, which excelled in both thought 
and Sufi religious experience. Soon he joined Nizam Al-Mulk at his 'Askar or military-political 
base.

A major heir to the cultural tradition of his native Khorasan, which excelled in both thought 
and Sufi religious experience. Soon he joined Nizam Al-Mulk at his 'Askar or military-political 
base. There he brought together in brilliant discussion the many visiting leading ulemas, imams