sion, 
if not a real clue or a clear allusion, that the addressees were either Abd al-Farisi, his biographer 
(al-Subki, Tabaqat al-Shafiiyya, Cairo, vol. 3, p. 137), or Abu Bakr Ibn al-Arabi (d. 543 A.H./1148 
A.D.), who evidently had met al-Ghazali shortly before he embarked on the writing of al-
Munqidh (al-Awasim min al-qawasim, Algeria, vol. 1, p. 30). A little-known fact about al-
Munqidh is that al-Ghazali states in his introduction that he wrote the work at the request of a 
brother in faith who asked him to reveal the sciences, the evil, and the depths of the schools of 
thought. What prevails with most scholars is that it was meant for a type of reader, and not for a 
particular individual. This vast majority, beating around the bush, have come nearer to the point 
but have fallen short of grasping it.  
In brief, we can summarize al-Ghazali’s meaningful introduction in two cardinal points. First 
and foremost, from the earliest stage of his life, al-Ghazali had been known as a fearless, sagacious, 
uncompromising seeker after truth. Secondly, al-Ghazali’s time was an epoch of vigorous 

intellectual activity and spiritual fecundity, so much so that for the average Muslim layman the 
controversies and sectarian cerebral confrontations resulted in little more than a welter of 
confusion and perplexities. For this very reason, al-Munqidh offered itself as a means of provoking 
intellectual impetus and kindling spiritual intuition, to the end of pronouncing sentence on faulty 
sects.   

Renown   

Through Western translations and scholarship on al-Munqidh, al-Ghazali is well-known to the 
scholars and reformers as a magnanimous, indefatigable and inexhaustible source of inspiration 
and impetus in exploring the higher realm of learning and scholarship. Some of al-Ghazali’s works 
were translated into Latin, e.g., his book al-Iqtisad fil Itiqad in the Middle Ages and later into 
several modern European languages. Hardly do we find a book on Islamic civilization without 
reference to al-Ghazali. A good number of orientalists have produced several works of outstanding 
value on his life and milieu. Many others have dealt with al-Ghazali within the scope of their 
writings and research. The output of the crop of orientalist writings on al-Ghazali is so voluminous 
as to defy classification in our present work. Baron Caradivo, e.g., wrote a book on al-Ghazali, 
(trans. into Arabic by A. Ziatar [Cairo: al-Halabi, 1950]) in which he explored the real position of 
the author of al-Munqidh in Sufi literature and practices. He noted that "al-Munqidh is a great 
psychological document of al-Ghazali’s time . . . ."  
D.B. Macdonald summed up the significance of al-Ghazali and the pioneering role he played 
in Muslim thinking in four main points. First, he discarded empty abstract scholastics and dogmas, 
and substituted them with direct contact with the Qur’an and Sunnah (tradition). Secondly, he laid 
emphasis on the fear of Allah by urging moral rectitude and to avoid the punishment of hell. 
Thirdly, it was he more than any other that established Islam on a firm and assured ground. 
Fourthly, he brought philosophy and theology within the grasp of the ordinary mind. (See Aspects 
of Islam [New York: Books for Libraries Press, 1971], pp. 36, 139, 194, 196-201; also The Life of 
al-Ghazali, JAOS 20 [1899], pp. 70-133.) This statement sounds scholarly but cannot pass without 
comment. Regarding the first point, it is absolutely correct that al-Ghazali brought the message of 
the Qur’an and Sunnah to ordinary life in clearer insight and practicality, i.e., from the ivory tower 
of scholasticism to the tangible and palpable reality of religion. To establish this, al-Ghazali had to 
wrestle with exponents of sectarian thinking and speculative theologians and jurists.