Recorded his confession of drinking alcohol and his pledge that he would never take the draught unless as medicine. 
It is evident that Ibn Sina was fond of banquets, luxury, and being entertained. He used to deliver his lectures at nighttime and at the end of his lectures ordered a banquet to be laid and music to be played for the pleasure of his guests and pupils. He used to drink to excess until his health began to deteriorate. As a cure, he took a powerful medicine which broke down his health. When he felt that his death was imminent, he stopped drinking and repented and asked God’s forgiveness. Like al-Ghazali, Ibn Sina died in his middle years. Yet it should not be overlooked that he was brought within the precincts of the Islamic tradition. He memorized the Qur’an when he was ten years of age. He mastered Islamic and Arabic literature by the time he reached sixteen and became well-known in the whole of the Islamic world both as a physician and as a philosopher. 
It is to the credit of Ibn Sina that he did not succumb to adverse sectarian influences. And he himself said that his father often read the epistle of the brethren of purity, Rasail Ikhwan al-Safa, yet was not influenced by them in any notable way. This in itself was a great sign of the independent mind and free-thinking he envisaged at an early stage of his life. In the same way as al-Ghazali, Ibn Sina was noted for his consistency from the beginning to the end of his life. The weight and style of his books in old age - say in his fifties - are as powerful and effective as those he wrote in youth. 

The first topic that appears immediately after al-Ghazali’s introduction to the al-Munqidh is sophistry: which is more or less a system of learning that misleads pupils or followers on narrow scales. In this section: 

- 1st, al-Ghazali, in his search after certitude was ushered into false views. 
- 2nd, When he resorted to reason, he discovered no distinction between his experience and the dream world. 
- 3rd, He reverted to the guidelines of reason. 

Al-Ghazali began his career with the study of theology, but theology failed to satisfy him. Its objectives were the protection of the sunnah, tradition, and its defense against the deviations of the heretics; it did not serve his purpose, which was the search for truth. 
But it is striking that he placed the speculative theologians, Mutakalimun, at the top of his list. The reason, as far as we can understand, is that this group of thinkers predominated over the rest and attracted people's attention. As they exercised immense influence upon the illusioned society, it was al-Ghazali's role to disillusion them from their own sophist illusionment. 
The eminent Sunni scholars attacked the speculative theology of al-Kalam and strongly warned Muslims against preoccupation with it as an undesirable innovation. Al-Ghazali himself wrote in more detail about the Kalam in his book al-Ihya. As an illustration, he says, "Tawhid" the oneness of God is the term which has changed its meaning. It now means the craft of theology, knowledge of methods of arguing and confronting adversaries, boasting, multiplying questions, and casting doubts on matters, showing down opponents. This is true to the point that some practitioners, i.e, Mu'tazilites, called themselves the people of justice and pure monotheism. 
In his search for truth, Imam al-Ghazali turned to philosophy, including the natural sciences, which gave him a penetrating insight into the marvels of creation. In the view of al-Ghazali no one who had studied anatomy could fail to notice the perfection of human and animal organs and to recognize in them evidence of the creator’s master hand. He found himself unable to go along with the natural scientists, in particular, he emphatically rejected their denial of resurrection and sensual pleasure.