(Restricting the Masses from Engaging in the Science of Kalam).
2. Against Batiniism: Combating Batiniism, especially the Ta'limites, was a major political and cultural campaign of the time. Ghazali played a central role in the intellectual dimension of this effort by his teaching and through a number of sharply written works.
3. Philosophy: Ghazali speaks of the need to understand thoroughly the ideas of philosophy and in Maqasid al-Falasifa (The Aims of the Philosophers -- Intentiones Philosophorum) produced a classic summary of Greek logic, physics, and metaphysics as presented by the Islamic philosophers of his day. The work was much used in the Middle Ages, especially in the West, as a definitive handbook of philosophy. However, Ghazali's intent in the work was to lay there the groundwork for the decisive attack on philosophy which he carried out in Tahafut al-Falasifa (The Incoherence of the Philosophers; Destructio Philosophorum). Despite Averroes's reply in Tahafut al-Tahafut some decades later, Ghazali succeeded in quite marginalizing philosophy, especially in Sunnite Islam, and thereby terminating the tradition of Islamic work in Greek philosophy.
The Munqidh min al-Dalal, the center of concern here, is a semi-autobiographical work. Through a tour of the intellectual horizons of the day, it leads the reader to Sufism as the only sure access to truth.
The title used here is a combination of two titles: Munqidh min al-Dalal wa l-mufi 'an al-Ahwal (What Saves from Error and Unveils the [Mystical] States [of the Soul]) and al-Munqidh min al-Dalal wa l-Muwassil ila Dhi l-'Izza wu l-Jalal (What Saves from Error and Unites with Power and Glory).
4. Spiritual Guidance: The Ihya' 'Ulum al-Din (The Revitalization of the Sciences of Religion) is his great spiritual work. Where the Munqidh leads one to the Sufi Way, this work enters into detail in describing what is discovered as one proceeds along this Way -- the savored experience itself, of course, remaining beyond words. The Ihya is composed of four parts, each having ten books. Part I begins with a book on knowledge which is followed by books on "The Five Pillars of Islam", i.e., the profession of belief, the canonical prayers, almsgiving, fasting, and pilgrimage. Part II concerns 'adat, or ways of acting regarding food, marriage, etc. Part III treats al-muhlikat (the things that lead to damnation). It begins with a psychological masterpiece on the mysteries of the heart and follows with books on ascetical practices for overcoming the appetites. Part IV concerns al-munjiyat (the things that lead to salvation) and constitutes his spiritual masterpiece. It treats repentance, gratitude, fear, hope, poverty, love, openness to God, spiritual awareness, the review of conscience, meditation, death, and the next life. All this is written with such great beauty that McCarthy cites an ancient author to the effect that "the Ihya would supply for all Islamic literature if the latter were to be lost" for it conveys "all that is best and most appealing in Islam as a religion and as a 'revelation' of God's love for man and the heights attainable by man's love for God."

Analysis of Al-Munqidh Min Al-Dalal

The Work

Al Ghazali wrote the Munqidh between 499/1105 and 500/1106 in Nishapur. He was fifty years old at the time and about to return to teaching. As a personal testimony, it calls to mind Augustine's Confessions, Descartes' Discourse on Method, and Newman's Apologia pro vita sua. Its complex intellectual structure and purpose make it one of the most outstanding works in world literature. Al Ghazali states in the introduction that he wrote the work at the request of a brother in the faith who asked him "to reveal . . .